Muhammad Areeb Kazmi
Dr. Irfan Muhammad 
Philosophical Hermeneutics
March 31, 2024
Habermas’s critical theory and his critique on scientism
Jürgen Habermas’s critical theory stands as a cornerstone in modern social and political philosophy. Habermas, a prominent figure of the Frankfurt school, challenged the uncritical acceptance of science as the sole source of legitimate knowledge. In this essay, we will explore what stood as the critical theory at Frankfurt school for philosophers before Habermas, and his critique on them, his critical theory. This essay also aims to delve into its foundational elements and then analyze his critique on scientism. Moreover, in order to better understand his critique on scientism, we will go beyond scientism and explore implications of how Habermas counters scientism, the role of critical reflection, dialogue, and Freud’s psychoanalysis in his critique.
It is important for us to study the predecessors of Habermas who worked on the critical theory at Frankfurt. As argued by Hans-Georg Gadamer, we cannot escape the history and prejudices which have been embedded into us by the tradition (Schmidt 142). Therefore we will briefly discuss the developments of critical theory before Habermas. The concept of critical theory has been ambiguous because it combines two meanings of the word Kritik in a productive way. We should bear in mind they were developed in the classical German philosophy. The first meaning stems from the Kantian program of transcendental philosophy, and it signifies the testing of legitimacy. On the other hand, the second meaning comes from the Young Hegelians’ attitude in the opposition of theory and practice, and it signifies negation. The Kritik, for Kant is to be the primeval act of testing of the validity claims of knowledge, free from prejudice, which has to be carried out only by the force of reason (Bubner et al. 42). While Kant spoke of Kritik as the high court of reason, Hegel’s doctrine of absolute spirit marked the end of this development. In agreement with philosophers like Horkheimer and Adorno, Habermas critiques Hegel’s project and flags it severely flawed. Since it asserts philosophy to be the actual science, Habermas argues that Hegel has blurred the relation between science and philosophy. Karl Marx succeeded Hegel and provided the guide to appropriating Hegel’s insights while demystifying them (Held 298). 
Marx comes with his methodology which pursues the scientific explanation of our given reality with a view to the future transformation of that reality (Bubner et al. 43). Habermas points out the difficulties of this methodology raises a question. What kind of theory is it that can accuse all philosophical and economic theories of ideologically masking reality, and which can still claim itself to have a theoretical status? It follows that if it is itself an ideology, then it will not be a science. But if it is a science, then it is not a Kritik (Bubner et al. 44). We will discuss Marx later, if time and space permits in the theory of knowledge. The critical turn in the theory happens with Horkheimer where the critical theory reflects on the interests which are posited by theory’s own measuring stick of rationality, such that the knowledge and interests coincide instead of diverging. Now, a new philosophical paradigm is to be established where firstly, Marx came up with the critique on political economy, aiming to free the humanity, as a science of economic laws and hence at least as ‘traditional as it is, a critical theory’ (Bubner et al. 45).
When it comes to Habermas, there is a fundamental shift in the situation of critical philosophy from merely the role of ‘fault-finding cultural critique and political column’ to the project of a systematic philosophy. We will observe later as Habermas suffers from the legacy of the ambiguous concept of Kritik in his attempt. The systematic framework that Habermas chooses to ground his work is in the philosophy of language instead of the idealist tradition of his predecessors of the analysis of consciousness. Referring to Horkheimer’s distinction between traditional and critical theory, Habermas presented his thesis in his inaugural lecture at Frankfurt. He makes it clear that sciences cannot be comprehended without the reference to the knowledge constitutive interests which govern them. According to Habermas, we should differentiate between the three forms, the empirical analytic sciences follow the technical knowledge-constitutive interest, the historical-hermeneutic sciences follow the practical interest in intersubjective understanding. Whereas the emancipatory sciences follow critical self-reflection (Bubner et al. 46). It can be observed that the third, new, category can be seen to contain the legacy of idealist philosophy which returns in the shape of two modern ‘quasi-sciences’, i.e., ideology critique and psychoanalysis. 
With their distinct, yet subtle, nature like that of psychoanalysis seeming to be a therapeutic Praxis dealing with psychic illness, Habermas would have to demonstrate that these two methods of elucidation of false consciousness are forms of science instead of being transcended from science. Habermas swiftly goes about this by illuminating the audience of how their special status is legitimated and why the other two sciences do not hinder us. Habermas says, “… What raises us out of nature is the only thing whose nature we can know: language…” (Bubner et al. 47) Habermas goes on to discuss the human interest in autonomy and responsibility and calls on that only in an emancipatory society, willing to free itself from the shackles of technocracy, will the communication be developed in a non-authoritarian manner. We see Habermas’s critique on Gadamer here who believes that we are a dialogue without taking into consideration, factors like power: “The ontological illusion of pure theory behind which knowledge-constitutive interests become invisible promotes the fiction that Socratic dialogue is possible everywhere and at any time…”  
Since every linguistic utterance receives its actual meaning in the to and fro of dialogue, the autonomy and responsibility of all participants is reaffirmed by every spoken sentence. We see the dream of the idealist philosophical tradition being fulfilled as the dialogue represents mutual recognition of participants as subjects with equal rights. We must also note what the philosophical theory traditionally has fallen prey to, that is the naïve belief of freedom which hinders the achievement of true freedom itself. Rudiger Bubner points out the problems in Habermas’s complex argument. Firstly, that language represents a rational principle, but it must fall back to an a priori ideal which is not identical to language as such (Bubner et al. 48). While it might be said that Habermas takes Kant’s doctrine of ‘fact of reason,’ language cannot be taken as a fact of reason since it is Habermas’s starting-point. Language, which is a given, will have its interpretation as a medium of free dialogue going back to an idea of rationality in the sense of intersubjective recognition. Therefore, in order to reach undistorted rationality in the linguistic medium of communication, we will have to presuppose a free society (Bubner et al. 49). 
Before discussing his critique on scientism, it is important to point out Habermas’s objections to the authoritative status of consensus through resources provided by the language in Gadamer’s dialogue (Edgar 85). Habermas also discusses the unequal power relations that might have altered or corrupted the linguistic and discursive resources that were provided by the tradition (Edgar 86). This is to realize that the language can be a medium of power and domination as well as understanding. He notes that an unequal power relation leads to a master slave debate instead of a free dialogue where the outcome has already been decided by the one holding more power (. However, Habermas is dealt with criticism as the danger of ideology lurks in another area where he does not suspect it. While the Socratic dialogues were means to gaining knowledge or freeing oneself from ignorance, they were not considered to be the the playing-field of an ideal society, something we can observe in the Platonic dialogue of Phaedo as Socrates prepares to drink the poison and meet the gods. The problem comes as dialogues in their linguistic forms can promote, both knowledge and sophistry, for logos alone are not sufficient for unconcealing the truth since they can be deceptive (Bubner et al. 51). Habermas realizes this shortcoming in one of his lectures and prepares to reckon with the possibility of an enlightenment which might just create false hopes and change nothing. We see that Wittgenstein gave an insight that the ‘plurality of possible language-games can be grouped together only in loose family likenesses’. Thus, the rich spectrum of human dialogue would not be limited to a single model of a scientific system of exact statements. The problem for Habermas comes when he essentially abandons the starting point of pragmatics of language by comprising the entire spectrum of practical communication in society into the model of seminar discussion in Humboldt’s sketches (Bubner 52).
For Habermas, the critical theory was an attempt to counter “scientism” (Edgar 56). Scientism refers to the idea that we no longer understand sciences as one form of knowledge, but rather science is the only form of knowledge and we identify knowledge with science. Habermas critiques the positivism which is deeply linked and synonymous to scientism. Although it started as an effort to critique ideology of religion, metaphysics, dogma, etc., it became a central element of technocratic consciousness and a key aspect of modern ideology. Thus epistemology as the critique of knowledge has been largely undermined for Habermas (Held 296). This meant that science could not be comprehended by philosophy, thus losing sight of the ‘significant role of the epistemic subject (the knower) and of reflection by the subject on their actions’ (Held 297). Habermas acknowledges the good intent that positivist philosophy initially had for the said reasons above as an effort to critique of ideology and science appeared to offer the road to salvation in the 18th and 19th centuries. However, on his account, scientific knowledge is certainly not sufficient for human freedom and emancipation despite being a necessary condition. We observe that Habermas believes that knowledge free of presupposition can mislead us, and follows Gadamer’s path of humans being linked with history and tradition as he examines positivism over the last one hundred years. He also believes in exploring certain questions and examining the works of men within the philosophy of science by which positivism can be brought to a point of ‘transcending its own limitations’ (Held 300). While studying Marx, Habermas notes that Marx took natural sciences as basic paradigm for knowledge while retaining important insights from the philosophy of reflection at the level of social theory. The main problem for Marx lied where he fails to recognize its implications for the epistemological and methodological status of his own work. Resultantly, Marx failed to differentiate between the logical status of the empirical analytic sciences and the sciences of humankind as critique which is crucial to the development of a science of human beings to Habermas (Held 299). 
Habermas also studies Mach for whom, facts are given in sensory experience. Mach considers the facts in sensory experience to be objectivistic as they ‘adequately describe reality as it is’, while Habermas points out them to be subjective in terms of individual observation reports (Held 301). Mach rules out the demand of criterion of facticity by ontologizing facts which make them given in experience, ruling subjectivism out as a priori. Habermas objects to this approach by pointing out that ‘how prior to all science can the doctrine of facts make statements about the object domain of science as such, if we only obtain information about the domain through science’ (Held 302). Habermas shows that the positivists trying to cling to a unified program of science could not ‘recognize that there are methodological procedures appropriate to understanding communicative interaction and intersubjectivity.’ The communication between a subject and an object, acting as a subject, and the communication between a subject and an object which cannot be so construed are of different natures. The latter being monologic while the former being dialogic in character (Held 303). In Knowledge and Human Interests, Habermas writes that Peirce was one of the first philosophers who realized the need to systematically reflect on science and to demarcate positivist approach in order to comprehend the logic of science and its relation to nature (Held 304) It should be noted that Habermas does not argue that it is never appropriate to study human subjects with the methods of a causal, nomological, science. The claim that he makes is that a science that is restricted by itself to this procedure would be incapable of understanding a complex, multi-faceted, social reality (Held 307). 
Habermas uses Freud's psychoanalytic theory as a prime model of a field that questions the dominance of scientific thinking. While Freud's research is based on observing and treating patients suffering from psychic illnesses, it also explores subjective experiences, unconscious wishes, and symbolic interpretations. Freud's psychoanalytic approach, focusing on interpretation and self-reflection, provides understanding of human psychology that goes beyond what can be learned through empirical observation alone. Although Freud mistook his work for knowledge-constitutive, natural sciences, Habermas argues only Freud and his psychoanalysis is the ‘tangible example’ of a science incorporating methodical self-reflection (Held 319). This has to do with the three levels being accomplished in the Freudian psychoanalysis. According to Habermas, Freud's approach to understanding human behavior goes beyond the confines of positivist science, acknowledging the influence of unconscious drives and repressed desires on individual and collective behavior and works beyond the procedures of hermeneutic science using interpretative framework as an emancipatory science (Held 320). He calls it depth hermeneutics for the main objective is to understand the subject and make them understand themselves under the deepest levels of human consciousness and awareness. Therefore, for Habermas, Freud’s psychoanalysis is concerned with the construction of interpretations as the interpreter goes from the basic level, the first interest, to the second, where he understands the patient through his experience. Finally, the third interest, comes into play as he tries to reconstruct the individual’s life histories with a therapeutic intent (Held 322). Thus, psychoanalysis shows us Versetehen, understanding, in action where the analyst and the analysand understand the subject together (Held 323). However, Habermas also criticizes certain aspects of Freudian psychoanalysis, particularly its tendency to pathologize non-normative behaviors. He argues that Freud's theory, while revolutionary in its time, may not fully account for the diversity of human experiences and the socio-historical contexts in which they occur. Nonetheless, Habermas transposes the model of the realm of social analysis and political practice (Held 323). The verification must come from the subject in hand reaching an understanding and reconstructing their life histories themselves to find their repressed desires and motives leading to their current state of affairs. In critical theory, the ultimate verification of the entire empirical-theoretical enterprise is dependent upon practice, i.e., the eradication of barriers to self-reflection and the overcoming of structures which support such barricades (Held 324). 
For Habermas, fostering critical self-reflection is crucial for challenging the hegemony of scientism and enriching our understanding of human experiences. By encouraging individuals to engage in dialogue, deliberation, and interpretation, critical reflection enables a more holistic approach to knowledge production that incorporates diverse perspectives and values. However, the relation between reflection and emancipation leads to some difficulties. It seems from Habermas’s formulation that self-consciousness, as in self-reflection, is the total concern of the process of emancipation. His critics were quick to criticize him for conflating reflection and practical engagement. As a result, Habermas clarifies his position that it was never his intention to conflate these phenomena and mentions that the practice of self-reflection is not a sufficient condition for the achievement of a real, material, freedom. The use of the word, reflection, itself is problematic as accepted by Habermas since it goes back to German Idealism, having two meanings. While it denotes conditions of potential abilities of a subject, it also denotes the reflection ‘upon unconsciously produced constraints to which a determinate subject succumbs in its process of self-reflection’ (Held 326). The concept of self-criticism or critical self-reflection is different since it ‘brings to consciousness those determinants of a self-formative process (Bildung) which ideologically determine a contemporary Praxis and conception of the world.’ Therefore, unlike rational reconstruction, self-criticism is directly linked with practice and is the mode of reflection which the analysand is encouraged to go in psychoanalysis (Held 327). It enables the examination of subjective interpretations, cultural standards, and historical backgrounds that influence human actions and social organizations. Additionally, engaging in critical reflection helps individuals develop self-awareness and independence, enabling them to question prevailing narratives and challenge oppressive systems, thus truly emancipating themselves as was in the case of Freud’s psychoanalysis.
While we have gone through Habermas’s critical theory and some of his critique on scientism and positivism, there has been a huge chunk of elements that I have missed for reasons of running behind the schedule. The reader might also face some gaps between the arguments and some ambiguity as some of the concepts have not been elaborated and analyzed in the optimal manner. However, we saw how important Habermas’s critical theory has been to not only the Frankfurt school, the world, but also to his critique of scientism. His emancipatory sciences have also led feminist scholars to engage with his work because it aligns with their pursuit of freedom. His critical theory enables us to engage critically with the challenges of the modern age by embracing self-criticism and working towards the emancipation in the public sphere to make grounds for meaningful dialogue not dominated by power and between subjects of equal rights. We can also gauge the implications of scientism for democracy and governance where not considering other forms of knowledge and interests might lead to inequality and unwanted consequences. 

Works Cited
Edgar, Andrew. The Philosophy of Habermas. Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, 2014. 
Held, David. Introduction to Critical Theory Horkheimer to Habermas. Wiley, 2013. 
Schmidt, Lawrence Kennedy. Understanding Hermeneutics. Taylor and Francis, 2016. 
Thompson, John B., et al. Habermas, Critical Debates. Macmillan, 1983. 

