Muhammad Areeb Kazmi
Professor Aeyaz Keyani
Ethics of AI
February 11, 2024
Reflection Paper 1
This reflection revolves around speculating how a deceiving clever mind like Bernays’ would have made use of the technological arsenal that exists today, the effects it would have had on society, and the ethical and legal mitigations to avoid risks. The Century of the Self documentary highlights how Edward Bernays, inspired by his uncle, Sigmund Freud’s philosophy and understanding of the human mind and species, capitalized his understandings to help capitalism reach its new heights. The documentary also mentions his intellectual successors, their rivals, and the developments that went through, from regime changes, politics, to the idea of individuality, Public Relations (PR), and businesses, which I will discuss ahead to some extent.
Personally, I do not know how Bernays would have made use of the technological resources made available today to his expense. It is beyond a common person’s imagination how well was he able to utilize the little resources of his time, his own narcissist assumptions about everyone being ‘stupid’, as told by his daughter, to implement and be successful in what he believed in. However, there is one thing I can surely assume: with the power of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and data, we would have seen a new face of this world for better or worse. His techniques and rhetoric is still applied in today’s American foreign policy. We have repeatedly heard about United States’ ‘resolve’ for spreading democracy. Be it the Iraq war in 2003, the Libya war, or its efforts to free the people of Iran in today’s age, the very policy was framed by Bernays when he enabled United Foods corporation for the regime change in Guatemala removing the socialist government setup and influencing the American establishment to take measures. Moreover, he also helped Roosevelt in displaying the image of the US fighting to bring democracy to the Europe in the World War. Clearly, he would have been successful in overthrowing various regimes especially the post-revolution Iranian regime today that clings on its existence on the anti-US rhetoric and the very sanctions that the US has imposed on the Iranians. 
When it comes to politics, Edward Bernays would have amplified the trend of macho, superhuman leaders who reflect or portray as ideals for the individual groups that play a huge role in electing their next leaders. In the documentary, it was shown how the Labor government candidate in the 1980s, as well as Bill Clinton in the United States did what the social analyst firm recommended them to do. Surely, these were the learnings taken from Bernays’ techniques of Public Relations. Today, we see people idealizing politicians like Imran Khan, Vladimir Putin, and Donald Trump. Each of the three mentioned individuals have a different persona and charisma, carefully carved for the people who will elect them. For Pakistani people, it is how charming, physically fit, and boastful their leader is. Russians will be charmed by how sporty, risktaking, and strong Putin is, while the Americans like how rich, egoist, and casual Donald Trump is. With Bernays’ hands on technology, he would have turned majority of their critics into their supporters and would have influenced even more leaders in the world to please their people. 
It is not to forget that Bernays’ main beneficiaries were and are the business corporations. While he helped them to identify groups of people, make them have desires, and then fulfill those desires, he also showed them how to adapt in the ever-changing demands and desires of the consumers. His methods of PR through celebrities, be it for politicians or business corporations, is still a trend today. We not only have big politicians related or affiliated to, or endorsed by big celebrities from the Hollywood, we also have micro-influencers on social media that endorse certain products to their audiences. The idea of consumers fulfilling their desires being an indicator for a flourishing democracy was itself a propaganda back at the time of Ronald Reagan. This was further magnified in the time of Clinton, and reached its peak at the time of George W. Bush. After the twin towers of the World Trade Center were bombed, the President of the United States stood there in front of the media and urged the people to “go shopping.” This had a never-ending effect on the American people that later coined the term, consumer patriotism. This is also heard in our day to day interactions as people I know buy expensive things from places and think they have done good to the place and the employees since the economy of that business would keep rolling, so the employees would not lose their jobs. With Bernays getting his hands dirty with the technology, the consumer patriotism and morality would have been magnified, to say the least.
The effects on the society and how people think would have been much worse, in my opinion, if Bernays would have had the charge. Tristan Harris’ testimony showed how there have been mental health issues for many teenager girls, for the attractive aspect of likes and followers breeds narcissism in itself. The hate, intolerance, and destruction we see in today’s ‘Gen-Z’ would have been amplified by a larger scale. While we observed that the trendy keywords on YouTube were hate, debunk, destroy, Jordan Peterson, it is worth noting all of them had negative connotations. Not only how today’s social media tends to increase the watch time by recommending spicy conspiracy theories which grab not only the users’ attention, but also it engage them in a bogus discourse by keeping the complex issues squeezed in a timeframe of 1 minute short reels, or a 140 word tweet. This creates vast polarization which serves the circular argument, I will rather call it a hermeneutic circle, that since polarization is in human nature, it will be attracted to short yet complex discourses. However, we fail the see the problem of complex issues being said in simple and less words, that in effect give birth to and an increase to the polarization. 
Furthermore, it means that the society will be more nihilist and fascist than it is today. With the peeling off of layers and the realization of the individual that there exists nothing, the new identities are easy to shape and create. It made the individuals in the 20th century realize that they had no moral obligation to others, which effectively led the denial of compassion to the homeless by Reagan which also led to Bill Clinton’s signature of the policy that led an end of state funded healthcare and welfare. This served not only to the loss of purpose, agency, and society for the individual, but also for the state and politicians. They realized and affirmed, as Bill Clinton and the Labor Party candidates did, that they had to adjust their policies and political ideologies against the desires of the individual swing voters. While the death of God, ethics, and the need to redefine ethics and morality already arrived in the Enlightenment, this has taken an adverse position in the present where even the most anti-nihilist and the ones who reject modernity are intrinsically nihilist, modern, and narcissists themselves. 
We did discuss some part of the death of institutions when it comes to the state. However, the death of individuality and humanism itself has been evident and discussed greatly by a humanist like Yuval Noah Harari in his books. As Mr. Harris’ testimony and the documentary mentioned, the individual was again grouped and categorized by different names like the individual directives. This brings a question, was the whole individualist/humanist campaign a capitalist propaganda in itself? For we see that the business model todays’ social media works on is keeping people inside their bubbles. You are shown what you want to be shown. An anti-Zionist will not be shown Zionist content, and vice versa. 
As a person who likes to speculate, I would have seen a person like Edward Bernays being considered an esteemed philosopher of the age, just like his uncle Sigmund Freud, or philosophers like Nietzsche, Heidegger, or Husserl were in their times. Being a clever person as he was, he would have solved the problem of medieval institutions that Mr. Harris points out while quoting his favorite socio-biologist, Mr. Wilson. At the accurate AI that can tell a person’s political ideologies or sexual orientations just by the pattern of the mouse movements or the clicks, Bernays would have not only amplified the Freudian philosophy of human species, but also be seen as a philosopher himself who has the capacity to rule and direct the irrational forces to a new modern institution. 
Regarding ethical and legal remedies, my understanding and imagination do not allow me to suggest ones in the modern context. One good point raised by Tristan Harris was the question of social media platforms not being responsible for the content posted, but responsible for the recommendations made. It will be interesting of how the governments, who are designed to please the masses, work around that if they do. However, I link everything with the understanding of the human brain which will help us understand AI, which can furthermore help in reaching a global consensus on the AI arms’ race and manipulation. Furthermore, the basic axioms of nihilism and creating new meanings out of exploitation are to be questioned if one needs to end the dilemma. While the medieval institutions might not be right in themselves, returning to some of them and seeking direction with morality and ethics might have some reparations.
The Ethics of AI course has been surprisingly good for me. For a philosophy course’s main objective, to me, is to make the students think. When I first saw the structure of the course taking help from documentaries and readings, and the presentations instead of an entire class of class discussion, I was a bit skeptical about how it will go. However, I have heard people they wrote entire reflections without the help of Chat GPT or AI tools. This is an indication that they have thought, which is surprising and a glad news for me who considers the use of AI in writing to be against the human core as it steals your ability to think and ponder. The course material is also attention grabbing in these times of minimal attention spans. I would have praised the professor and his efforts if it was not the fear of being labeled as sugarcoating.
Works Cited
Curtis, Adam, Century of The Self, BBC News, April 29th, 2002. URL: (907) The Century of the Self - Part 1: "Happiness Machines" - YouTube
Feaver, Peter. “President Bush urged people to go about their daily lives.” Foreign Policy, 2014. URL: Now I remember why President Bush urged people to go about their daily lives – Foreign Policy
