The Channel Islands Handbook
Words: 36337  Pages: 83

Introduction
Background and Scope
The Channel Islands government is committed to ensuring that Lawbreakers, such as money Launderers and terrorists, cannot Legalise the profits of crime via the Channel Islands or use its fund and business industries.
The Handbook is a report on the criteria of mitigating terrorist funding and financial fraud. The guideline covers business organisations and financial institutions for all specified investments.
If a firm or institution is complacent in Laundering the profits of crime or funding terrorist organisations, it might face regulatory analysis, the reduction of its standing and criminal investigations. The participation of a specified firm with illegal profits or terrorist capital would also harm the integrity and status of the Channel Islands within the global finance environment.
Under the Channel Islands Law, crimes are prosecutable, with the exclusion of a few small offences that concern public purchase. The scope of violations is broad and includes, but not restricted to, the following:
a.	Involvement in a criminal group and racket

b.	Terrorist acts and vices

c.	Funding branded nuclear warheads

d.	Human trading, smuggling and trafficking

e.	Sexual abuse and child exploitation

f.	Illegal sale of narcotic compounds and substances

g.	Unlawful arms marketing
 
h.	Marketing stolen products

i.	Fraud, inducement and tax invasion

j.	Piracy

k.	Ecological offence;

L Vandalism, homicide, robbery, trafficking, forgery, coercion and hijacking.
While the provisions within this guide cover all business investments that apply a risk-based strategy and client due diligence, some obligations in this Handbook are irrelevant to specific industries.

Handbook Purpose
The Channel Islands Handbook will assist companies to operate under the requirements of applicable laws on funding terrorism and money laundering to protect the system from abuse.
Money laundering is an act of concealing criminal proceeds to make them appear legit. ML is also the process of evading arrest, conviction and prosecution by disguising the origin of illegal proceeds of criminal activities.
Financing terrorism seeks to strengthen a group's financial base or advance the cause of a minority movement. FT could be done with legitimate and illegal proceeds of business transactions.
The Channel Islands Handbook sets modalities to detect and counter money laundering and FT using compliance strategies approved by the Commission.
The Commission recognises the various tactics adopted by industries that are specified to prevent money laundering and terrorist funding. This guide attempts to embrace a technology­ neutral position, allowing the company to choose any technological alternative (s) appropriate to satisfy its duties.
 
The Channel Islands Handbook introduced the concept of Money Laundering Compliance Officer (MLCO), who enforces compliance of all entities to the AML/CFT requirements.
The MLCO officer must monitor and test systems, investigate non­ compliance, create effective control mechanisms, and report its findings to the Board of the Channel Islands.
With this directive, the MLCO is authorised to act as an MLRO as required in specific duties.
The FATF 2012 approvals say that companies need to possess an autonomous audit function to check AML/CFT compliance.
Under the risk-based approach, the Channel Islands created improvements to the principles and advice across the Handbook to allow companies to embrace a risk-based strategy.
The guidelines were expanded to include obligations on risk evaluations and introduce concepts like the weighting of risk variables.
Firms should consider all risk factors regarding business associations or transactions to ascertain whether their aggregate impact may increase or reduce the corporation's risk exposure. Risk factors must be weighted based on their significance.
Under business risk assessment, the Handbook was expanded to include additional details about the appraisal and certification of evaluations.
The board has to take possession of and responsibility to the BRA and create the company's risk appetite.

Failure to Meet the Required Standards
For any company, whether controlled or listed with the Commission, the consequences of any substantial failure to satisfy the criteria demanded, the Commission will invoke legal solutions.
 
The Commission will impose a variety of disciplinary and monetary sanctions, including the capability to remove, restrict or revoke the license of the business where applicable.
If the organisation is listed and controlled by the Commission, it must evaluate the failure of compliance by the company its supervisors, directors and employees. In defining whether the company aligns its business with honesty and aptitude and if a 'natural person' is appropriate, the Commission must refer to the compliance rules of Schedule 3.
Where the Commission does not govern the company, the authorities must refer to the compliance rules of Schedule 3 to consider the Listing of the firm.

Data Protection
The Law requires the company to organise and preserve records and certification. Where such documents and certification include private information, the company must comply with the Privacy and Protection Act for individuals within the EU.

The Financial Action Task Force (FATA)
As the name implies, The FATF is an intergovernmental organisation created by the ministers of its member authorities. The requirement for the FATF would be to establish criteria and to encourage the successful execution of Legal, functioning, and supervisory steps for combating money laundering, funding terrorism and other associated risks to the integrity of the global financial system.
The FATF approvals and endorsements are recognised as the global AML and CFT regulations and standards. The FATF references establish a global standard that states should implement through steps adapted to their conditions. The FATF approvals and endorsements provide procedures and measures nations must
 
•	change to identify threats and create policies and national co­ ordination
•	Mitigate money laundering, funding terrorism and proliferation of biological weapons
•		Apply precautionary steps for the financial industry and other monetary institutions
•	Set roles and responsibilities of its competent agencies

•	Improve the transparency and accessibility of beneficial ownership data of authorised individuals, and legal agreements
•	Facilitate global co-operation.

Corporate Governance
Effective corporate governance must all the board of directors to pursue goals in the interests of the company and its shareholders and should facilitate operational tracking to evaluate its compliance with anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism funding.
A corporate governance structure is the categorisation of mandate and duties among members, like the directors, administrators and other stakeholders and its requirements.
The establishment of an effective corporate governance system facilitates confidence and accountability for long-term expenditure, financial stability and company ethics.
Effective corporate governance creates a structure on guidelines, controls and processes of the company to mitigate money laundering and terrorism financing.

The Channel Islands Code of Corporate Governance
The company shall maintain superior standards of corporate governance to provide a controlled financial service business and
 
respective managers using an efficient framework to discharge their responsibilities effectively and economically, the Commission.

Board Responsibility for Compliance
The board of directors shall handle the company effectively to observe, comprehend and assess the possible threat or risks, such as money laundering and terrorism financing. The management shall take possession of, and liability for the company risk assessments and evaluation.
The board must evaluate its risk appetite, the exposure to ML and FT activities based on its hierarchical structure, clients, nations, boundaries, and how it implements its services.
The evaluation shall consider the impact of threats recognised, which may surpass the aggregate of each risk component.
Based on its business hazard evaluation, the firm must adopt an effective strategy to counter tax evasion and financing of psychological oppression.
The management shall establish and sustain appropriate and effective strategies, controls, and procedures using the size, character and the complexity of its organisation.
These strategies, controls, and processes must allow the company to conform to the standards of the Commission. The requirements include:
a.	Organise, record and preserve business risk evaluations to categorise the underlying ML and FT threats and to specify its risk appetite.
b.		Facilitate threat evaluations of business associations and intermittent transactions to classify those that require ECDD and SCDD measurement.
 
c.		Employ adequate COD obligations to sort and confirm the identity of clients, beneficial owners and other relevant stakeholders, whether natural people, legal officers and legal agreements and to ascertain the purpose and character of the company connection or intermittent trade.
d.		Employ ECDD guidelines to business associations and intermittent trades that score higher threat assessment of money laundering and financing terrorism.
e.		Apply SCDD guidelines in situations where the firm's transactions on ML and FT have been measured as low.
f.	Facilitate trade and action monitoring.

g.		Monitor company associations on a scale appropriate to guarantee that unusual and questionable activities are emphasised and prioritised.
h.		Monitor clients, payees, beneficial owners and other stakeholders based on the EU recommendations.
i.		Report immediately to the financial intelligence service where the compliance officer suspects that the firm or individual is an accomplice in ML or FT activities.
j.	Investigate money transfers and payment transactions where the employee acknowledges incomplete or missing transfer data of the payer and payee.
k.	Evaluate prospective workers to ensure the integrity and competence of staff and directors.
L Approve and organise appropriate and adequate AML and CFT workshops and training to workers and managers.
m. Manage, store, and maintain databases for timely retrieval and accessibility.
Board Oversight of Compliance
 
Under this obligation, the organisation shall maintain adequate coverage of all compliance requirements and policy provisions.
The board of management should consider the relevance and efficacy of its compliance agreement and its coverage for the inspection of operational transactions using the demands of Schedule 3.
Based on this obligation, the firm shall appoint the MLCO who will enforce and implement the company's compliance policies to avert and detect ML and FT transactions.
The board must evaluate its risk assessment strategy and recommend whether to maintain an independent financial evaluation.
The board should guarantee that the compliance inspection coverage considers the size, character, and benefits of the company, which includes the threats identified in the company risk evaluation. The coverage includes a need for sample testing of their efficacy and adequacy of its policies, processes and operational controls.
The board shall deploy a risk-based strategy after specifying its compliance inspection coverage. Therefore, the policy must examine the suitability, efficacy and adequacy of the firm's control systems based on its obligations.
This includes the following but not Limited to:

a.	The implementation of CDD approaches.

b.	The firm's management information.

c.	The testing and organisation of third party transactions.

d.	The proficiency of the money Laundering reporting officer.

e.	The control of confidential disclosures under the financial intelligence service.
f.	The control and management of sanction threat and notices.
 
g.	The provision of AML and CFT workshops to guarantee quality training, knowledge and improved performance.
The board shall assign its duties but must review its compliance with the AML and CFT regulations and standards.
Where the company classifies any deficiencies based on compliance, the management must fix those deficiencies and provide recommendations for adoption.
Where a different entity manages the company, the obligation for its compliance must be evaluated by the board of the new entity.

Outsourcing Responsibilities
Where the company outsources its services to another institution, its board must manage the compliance process to prevent illegal transactions and operations.
If the company agrees to delegate or outsource its functions to another party, it ought to:
a.	Review the guidelines of the Commission.

b.		Apply a 'term of reference' explaining the provisions of this agreement
c.	Define the roles and duties of the company and the third party agent.
d.	Separate the functions of the reporting officer, the compliance officer and other outsourced agents.
e.		Guarantee proper supervision of the task undertaken with the third party agency or institution.
Before its approval to outsource its services, the company must conduct a threat assessment of possible exposures to ML and TF operations and must document its findings as a business risk analysis.
 
The company must investigate the threats identified with its assessment of an outsourcing agreement and conduct a continuous risk assessment process.
Where the firm approves the recommendation to outsource its services, the organisation must ensure that:
a.	The third-party provider:

1.	It has adequate knowledge, competence, and expertise.

2.	The firm understands the Commission's AML and CFT requirements.
3.	Is adequately resourced to conduct its responsibilities.

4.	Has effective policies, methods, and techniques that reflect the changing trends in ML and FT transactions.
5.		Is evaluated and subjected to specific due diligence to guarantee the integrity of the outsourced agent.

b.	The assignment of the third party is observed and measured to guarantee it conforms to the recommendations of the Channel Islands handbook.
c.	The findings and documents of transactions submitted by the outsourced party are genuine, accurate, precise, clear and contains detailed information on the working modalities of the organisation.
d.	The accounts obtained by the outsourced party explain the strategy of its services and assessment procedure.
The board management must verify the veracity of reports provided by a third party to avoid intentional misrepresentation.
Where the company accepts to outsource its function to an unknown entity, the board must verify if the entity has the capacity and policy to detect and counter ML and FT operations. The
 
company should consider whether outsourcing plans create challenges and aid money laundering activities.

Foreign Divisions and Subsidiaries
Under the Commission's mandate, a company must guarantee that its subsidiaries or divisions comply with:
•	The regulations of the Channel Islands Handbook.

•		Conditions or regulations applicable in that territory or state that is compliant with the Financial Action Task Force.
The AML and CFT strategies must be aligned to suit the geographical trends of the substation.
The company must ensure that its foreign divisions execute policies, processes and controls that counter and detect money-laundering activities.
The strategies and controls must ensure that safeguards about the confidentiality and use of data exchanged between the company and its subsidiaries are secured.
Along with notifying the Commission of its findings, the company should ensure that proper controls are enforced in areas where compliance is ineffective.
The company must evaluate the AML and CFT process in areas of least resistance to prevent ML or FT transactions.
Where the company is a currency service supplier registered with the Commission, they must employ brokers to conduct its responsibilities.

Liaison with the Commission
The board of this company shall notify the Commission of any security breach or failure to implement its control and policies. This list is not definitive but could be used as a guide for the
 
undersigned information. The company must notify the Commission when:
a.	The company clarifies its compliance monitoring agreements and categorises the regions of non-compliance
b.	The company receives red flags by a third party identifying regions where remediation work is advocated.
c.	The company receives a report by an informer.

d.	The company acknowledges that non-compliance exists across its subsidiaries or divisions and may have affected its policies and controls against AML and CFT requirements.
e.	The company discovers the outsourced party neglected its compliance policies and controls.
f.	The firm identifies any material of non-conformity between the parties involved and mutual trade with a related link to a state Listed in the Commission's business group.
g.		Any violation of the requirements attracts the Commission's sanctions.
The Commission must be notified when the firm breaches its administrative protocols.
The firm shall exclude the following scenarios from the notification process when:
•	The event or activity is isolated

•	The action can be resolved without hesitation.

•	The operation does not constitute a regulatory risk to the organisation.
•	It cannot undermine the accuracy of:

o	The CDD data of the client or stakeholder.

o	The company's knowledge of the beneficial ownership of the client.
 
o	The company's understanding of the function and planned action of the business transaction.

The company must record all transactions irrespective of its priority risk measurement. The Commission reserves the authority to request for all transactions without receiving any formal notification of compliance.
Where the company has decided that an issue deserves notification to the Commission, the Commission shall receive prior information even when the matter is under investigation.
While not a comprehensive List, these are instances where the Commission acknowledges the poor reporting process. It is a matter of poor reporting when:
a.	The company Lacks the funds to undertake the necessary remediation work before informing the Commission
b.	The company has discovered no proof that a real financial fraud occurred due to non-compliance policies and controls.
c.	The board decides to postpone the notification process while it conducts a risk assessment analysis.
Key Persons
Money Laundering Compliant Officer
The firm must appoint a compliant officer (MLCO) to conduct its operations.
The appointment must be thorough under standard procedures. Therefore, the MLCO must
•	Be a natural individual

•	Be of supervisor Level

•	Possess skilled knowledge, ability and expertise to match a compliance function within the company
 
•		Be utilised by the company within the same category as the firm (where it is suitable for the employee of their supervisor to be recommended)
The company shall ensure that the appointed officer:

•	Has authorised access to the documents of the company

•	Has adequate funds and assets to do their responsibilities

•	Gets the collaboration of their company's staff

•	Is conscious of their duties

•	Reports to the board regularly

The officer must observe and report compliance with policies, controls and procedures to mitigate, prevent and discover ML and FT.
The board is accountable for the company's compliance operations such as setting appropriate and effective policies, regulations and guidelines to prevent and tack money laundering activities and terrorist financing.
Functions of the MLCO comprise:

a.		Assessing the observation and analysing of AML and CFT guidelines, processes standards and systems to evaluate their appropriateness and efficacy
b.	Exploring issues of non-compliance

c.	Setting standards to mitigate threats arising from the company's compliance review to fix problems where necessary
d.	Acting as a contact person to address compliance challenges

The money laundering and complaint officer MLCO shall supervise oversight functions.
A natural person can act as the MLRO and MLCO simultaneously.
 
Money laundering Reporting Officer
Similar to the MLCO, the firm must appoint a natural person to discharge its mandate.
The appointment must be thorough under standard procedures. Therefore, the MLRO must.
a.	Be a natural individual.

b.	Be of supervisor level.

c.		Possess skilled knowledge, ability and expertise to match a compliance function within the company.
d.		Be utilised by the company within the same category as the firm (where it is suitable for the employee of their supervisor to be recommended).
The company shall ensure that the MLRO:

a.	Has authorised access to the documents of the company.

b.	Has adequate funds and assets to do their responsibilities.

c.	Gets the collaboration of their company's staff.

d.	Is conscious of their duties.

e.	Reports to the board regularly.

The mandate of the MLRO empowers them to work without hindrance and act independently.
The MLRO has to be liberated to get immediate access to the financial intelligence service to report questionable activity.

Nominated Officer
A nominated officer acts on behalf of a reporting manager. The nominated officer shall receive the firm's disclosures and other compliance operations.
 
The nominated officer must be a natural individual and should attain the manager level. The officer shall possess the right knowledge, ability and expertise.
All employees within the company should be mindful of the natural individual (s) to whom disclosures should be produced in the absence of the MLRO.
The obligations in this section do not apply where the company comprises one investor a license holder and a normal person enrolled as a prescribed business.

Risk-Based Strategy
Introduction
This section will help the company in carrying a risk-based strategy to mitigate the use of goods and services for money laundering and financing terrorism. The standard guidelines, following the Channel Islands Handbook, can be categorised into three main structures.
•		Risk-Based Strategy: The guideline on this structure summarises risk-based strategy
•	Investment Risk Assessment: The guidelines on this structure summarise business risk assessment associated with money laundering and financing terrorism. The regulation empowers the firm to conduct risk appetite.
•		Link Risk assessments: the guideline under this section describes the applicable responsibilities for the running of risk assessments of existing and new business associations and intermittent trades.
Definition, Context and Importance
A risk-based strategy encourages the development of diagnostic measures that are linked with the ML and FT vulnerabilities identified with the company and to cope with these threats from the cost-effective and impartial way.
 
The firm must:

•	Know its ML and FT threats,

•	Create effective strategies and designs to:

o	Classify

o	Evaluate

o	Prevent

o	Handle and observe threats based on the demands of the Handbook

A risk-based strategy recommends actions to handle the ML and FT vulnerabilities confronted by the company:
a.	Classifying threats posed to this business from ML and FT and regions with higher risk score
b.		Analysing the likelihood of these threats occurring and its effect on the firm's business operations
c.	Mitigating the incidence of identified risks and its consequence using proper and effective strategies, controls and techniques
d.	Handling the residual threats arising from vulnerabilities the company cannot re-evaluate
e.		Assessing and monitoring business risks identifying if there are trends in the vulnerabilities, which demand adjustments to the firm's strategy, processes and regulation.
Under the risk-based strategy, it is vital that documentation is retained to ensure the board and senior administration will demonstrate their compliance.
A risk-based strategy begins with the classification and evaluations of threats that require managerial processes. The firm shall evaluate the risk of its involvement in ML and FT activities based on clients, countries, products and geographical locations.
 
In defining the risk-based strategy, the company must analyse and comprehend how the recognised ML and FT threats affect its enterprise. The analysis should consider a firm's risk appetite and impact on its strategic goals.
With the deployment of risk evaluations and conclusions, the company can establish the foundation for a risk-sensitive method to manage and mitigate money-laundering activities. A risk-based strategy does not exempt the company from applying enhanced steps where it identifies prioritise risk variables as detailed this Handbook.
The regulations described in this Handbook do not prohibit the supply of any services or the endorsement of any client unless there are reasonable grounds to assume that the client or the owner is connected with ML or FT activities and operations. The risk-based strategy as described in this manuscript expects that the dangers posed by clients, nations, services, trades and delivery stations are recognised, evaluated and mitigated, and that proof of these assessments and controls are is recorded and reviewed periodically.
By embracing a risk-based strategy, the company must ensure that steps to avert or lessen money laundering activities or to finance terrorism are proportionate with the identified threat. Risk evaluations permit the company to make decisions about effective ways to allocate its assets and ascertain its tolerance for risk.
Systems cannot detect or prevent ML and FT operations. A risk­ based strategy will balance the cost weight on the firm and its clients using an effective appraisal of the threat. The firm shall focus its controls where it is required and has many effects.
The Advantages of a risk-based strategy include:

a.	Knowing the ML and FT risks change across its clients, nations, locations and services
 
b.	Enabling the board to use its approach on specific, allowing managers to prioritise customers and investors
c.	Facilitating a cost-effective method of risk control

d.	Reproducing expertise and proportionality by modifying strategies and actions to risk assessment
e.		Allowing the use of these requirements for all relevant risk variables
f.	Permitting risk accumulation, evaluation, assessment, prevention and control measures
Businesses differ in size and operations materially. A strategy that prevents ML and FT actives in one transaction could be unsuitable in another. The section offers knowledge on risk variables that supports threat management framework.

Diagnosis and Mitigation of Hazards
Risk can be measured under three variables, and its assessment must apply control based on these factors:
•	Threat: the firm shall classify threat as an individual, investor, stakeholder, product or service that has the capacity to trigger harm
•	Vulnerability: The firm shall classify vulnerability as the likelihood of gaps, Channel, or weak links that can be abused, encouraged or facilitate the threat activity.
•	Outcome: The firm shall recognise threat outcomes as the effect or impact of money laundering and FT activities.
Having recognised its weak links, the company should enforce strategic actions to mitigate and prevent its outcome. The firm must regulate vital controls or processes to decrease the risks identified. The recorded threat assessments will aid the company in creating its risk-based strategy.
 
The company shall adhere to standard practices as prescribed by the Commission and the NRA. Under their guidance, the firm shall prioritise risk variables, measure risk appetite and develop strategies to mitigate them.
Besides those mentioned previously, data about ML and FT risk factors could be sourced from different Channel or via accessible databases or tools that pool data from several resources.
Information sources include but not limited to:

a.	Documents published by the UK, EU, and financial institutions

b.	Journals and statements released by law enforcement agencies such as financial intelligence service for example risk assessment reports, alarm notices and categories
c.	Data published by the Commission, which include but not limited to warnings and the justification of its activities and enforcement procedures
d.		Data from global standard regulator, for example, advice papers and press releases on target threats or mutual analysis intelligence connected to specific countries or geographical area
e.	Data provided by corporate industries such as risk categorisation and emerging dangers threats
f.	Intelligence printed by non-governmental organisations

g.	Data printed by respectable and dependable resources

Documenting and Maintaining reports about the outcomes of the company's threat assessment framework will demonstrate how managers:
•	Identify and assess the risk of aiding ML and FT operations

•	Implements effective policies, controls and measures to handle and enhance ML and FT threat
 
•	Ensures transparency of the board concerning the performance of its strategies, procedures and controls.
Threat Accumulation
The company must consider all risk variables to ascertain whether their collective impact may increase or reduce the company's risk exposure and its impact on the control strategy deployed to mitigate the threat.
This type of approach is applicable to company business operations and individual investment relationships or intermittent transactions.
Additionally, other operational aspects, such as outsourcing might raise the threat Level of each transaction. The firm shall evaluate third party transactions to prevent, detect and control the vulnerabilities of ML and FT.

Weighing Risk Factors
When a firm weighs the risk of any investment or transactions, the board must evaluate risk variables differently based on its relative significance.
When considering risk variables, the company should make an informed decision about the significance of each factor assessment as it relates to money laundering activities and transactions.
The weight of the threat score may vary between products and customers. When considering risk variables, the company should ensure:
•	The threat score does not reflect one risk variable

•	Financial factors do not affect the risk evaluation

•	The threat score does not affect another higher risk category

•		The firm can overrule any mechanically-generated scores. The justification to overrule the threat score must be recorded
 
Where the company uses software programs to assign threat scores, the board must understand its calibration. The firm must show evidence that the threat assessment was computed based on standard practice.

Policies, Strategies, and Controls
The Channel Islands handbook describes the modalities and obligations for effective policy, control and strategy. The company should:
•		Create effective control systems and procedures approved by its committee that are appropriate to detect, prevent and manage:
o	Threats identified in its risk evaluations and assessments

o	Risks related or applicable to the company and identified by the NRA

•		Examine and monitor the execution of these policies and improve them where necessary to facilitate risk mitigation and control
•		Adopt effective measures to mitigate prioritised risk dangers identified in the business enterprise.
The company's policies should consider the nature and sophistication of its operation with the threat identified in the business risk evaluations. The risk evaluations must be detailed to demonstrate the method by which the analysis was conducted.

Business Risk Assessments
Introduction
A critical component of a risk-based strategy requires the company to identify regions where its goods and services could be subjected to the vulnerabilities of ML and FT. the firms shall adopt effective
 
actions ensure that all identified risks are mitigated via the control mechanism.
The company's risk evaluations aid the company in creating the assessment and provide a means to determine the level to its services are to money laundering activities.
The board shall communicate all business investment risks assessment and risk appetite to the managers of operations and compliance.
Such awareness and communication will provide information on the firm's daily operations, employee job description, and threat assessment process.

Structure and Content
The firm shall conduct an appropriate and structured business risk assessment on money laundering vulnerability and FT operations.
In executing the company risk assessments according to Schedule 3, the company must ensure that threat evaluations ML and FT operation are different from one another, clearly covering various vulnerabilities and shall reflect effective strategies to mitigate the risk score.
The arrangement of the company's risk evaluations is an issue to be determined by the company. Irrespective of the structure used, it is necessary that the company's risk evaluations must be recorded in accordance with the Channel Handbook. The firm shall package its assessment analysis in one file system.
The firm shall conduct the business risk assessment based on:

•	Clients status and beneficial owners of consumers

•	States and geographical areas

•	Goods, services, trades, delivery stations and specifically on ML or FT threats that might appear in:
 
o	The development of new goods and new business techniques before such goods are accessible and practices embraced
o	The utilisation of emerging technologies for both the new and pre-owned goods before such technology is utilised and embraced

The company risk tests should consider the findings of the NRA and reveal whether the identified threats are applicable to the firm's business investments and its efficacy in mitigating these risks.
In accordance with the provisions of the Channel Islands handbook, the firm will consider all risk variables prior to deciding:
a.	The degree of risk of all business investments

b.	The company's risk appetite

c.	The proper mitigation strategy to adopt and implement

Along with identifying areas of exposure ML and FT threats, the business risk analysis must include references how the company manages vulnerabilities, controls systems and procedures.
Industry businesses should have generic threat variables. The company may establish risk factors variables specific to its operations and must be evaluated in the business threat assessment.
The company cannot replicate any business risk evaluations prepared by a different institution or use non-tested appraisals that identify ML and FT vulnerabilities. Each treat assessment should be verified to ensure it aligns with the firm's control policies and procedures.
The approach in embracing a non-tested evaluation concept could create new vulnerabilities in classifying and recognising ML and FT threats specific to its enterprise. As a result, the firm may combine
 
inadequate materials and control systems that are inappropriate in risk assessment operations.
The recommendations of this Handbook prescribe that:

a.	Business risk evaluations cannot be copied or lifted from another company's website or database. Each organisation must deploy strategies that are tested within its business operations to detect and mitigate money laundering activities and financing terrorism.
b.		A business risk assessment must not be created with generic data. Such actions show that the board cannot manage its ML and FT operations.
c.		A business risk assessment must contain unsubstantiated and generalised references to the threats faced by the company. For example, a reference of low-risk appetite means there is a significant likelihood the firm's services and goods can be used to fund terrorism. Such assumptions cannot be accepted, except there is strong evidence that details how the analysis was conducted.
d.		A business risk assessment must concentrate on remote risk variables and geographical location.
Sometimes threats could have variations or a range of risk classes; for instance, there might be investment risks created by the client's applications, or crime risk caused by ML and FT transactions. The company could combine theses risk without affecting individual characteristics of each vulnerability.

Risk Appetite
The company's risk appetite is a significant element in executing its business risk assessments, establishing the quantity of ML and FT threat they can accept. Having recognised the ML and FT risk for the business, identifying the quantity of such a threat is a fundamental component of the plan to mitigate its vulnerabilities.
 
The board is responsible for aligning the company's risk appetite with its framework for risk-taking and evaluation. Risk appetite describes the amount of threat a firm is willing to accept while conducting its business operations. It also defines the firm's risk threshold and boundaries, beyond which the company shall apply on control measures and regulations.
Based on this definition, the company's design of risk appetite must comprise a qualitative report and a quantitative approach to facilitate its risk appetite. The qualitative report describes profiles customers, countries or geographical locations, while the quantitative measures show the firm's priority classification, tolerance to risk factors, operational guidelines and resource limitations.
In computing its risk requirement, the company ought to be rational with its business design. A company anticipating business transactions or operations from clients and countries with a higher risk index, supplying huge risk merchandise or services or using a large proportion of high-risk associations could pose a high-risk appetite, and its business risk assessments must be created accordingly.
The firm could use this non-exhaustive collection of queries to establish and create its risk appetite.
a.	What are the strategic aims of the company? Are they valid?

b.	What risks could these goals create for the company?

c.	What will be the substantial risks the board is can accept?

d.	What will be the substantial risks the board must reject?

e.	Does the board understand the character and extent of risks it can accept and still achieve its strategic goals?
f.	Has the board and management team analysed the capacities of the company to handle the perceived risk?
 
g.	What ability does the company have to handle risks?

h.	Do workers of the company know their function and responsibility of managing risk?
i.		How much does the company invest in compliance and risk management operations? How much is needed to prosecute its risk management operations?
Inspection
The firm shall inspect, and review is threat evaluations annually but could enforce quarterly supervisions when modifications in business trends are noticed.
As the actions of this company may change, the corresponding ML and FT threat could be adjusted. Business mergers, the debut of a new service or product, a restructuring or a reversal of supplier engagement are only a few of the events that could affect the type and classification of risks to which the company could be vulnerable. Based on these assumptions, the firm shall review and inspect its control mechanism to ascertain that it remains effective and potent.
Note that other functional changes, such as worker numbers or alteration to policies, can affect the tools necessary to handle ML and FT threats.
Where modifications to the company's risk evaluations are created, the board must ascertain if these changes would influence the revised risk evaluations and make any adjustments it considers ineffective.

Risk Factors
The firm shall use the examples below to assess the risk factors of any business interaction. The summarised list highlights the variable risk assessment in ML and FT activities.
Client threat:
 
a.	The nations, territories and geographical areas by which clients perform their business transactions.
b.	The sophistication of client ownership arrangements.

c.	The sophistication of authorised persons and legal agreements.

d.	The utilisation of introduced professional structures.

e.	The approval or use of intermediary connections.

f.	The number of company investments labelled as priority risk.

g.	The amount of customers and stakeholders classified as PEPs and their affiliated regions and territories.
Product and Service Threat:

a.	The character, scale, diversity and sophistication of the services and goods of the company.
b.	The markets based on geography and type of customer.

c.	The supply Channel utilised by the company.

d.	The value of each transaction.

e.	The character, scale and geographic regions related to funds collected by the customers.
f.	Whether the firm permitted unidentified third parties operations.
Other possible sources of threat include:

•	Internal or external audit report

•	Classification of FT and ML operations and case studies

Business Practice and Products
The firm shall evaluate its operations before embracing new products or company practices to ensure that risk evaluations have identified and evaluated any ML and FT threats arising from the adoption of new trends and products.
 
References to brand goods must be classified as goods under evaluation that has new ML or FT threat priority assessment.
References to business procedures describe methods and process by which the firm adopts different goods and services.

New Technologies
The firm shall investigate the business treat of new technologies to detect and mitigate any ML and FT risks.
New technologies interrupt the shipping or trade Channel of conventional goods and solutions and the production of new brands using enhancements in innovation. Examples of emerging technologies include the utilisation and adoption of ledger design for securities logistics through the swapping of virtual assets.
The threat assessment of emerging technologies must include the testing of ML and FT vulnerabilities are inherent in the adoption or use of automated procedures to ensure that appropriate security architecture is deployed and implemented. This includes assessing the innovation with the estimated use of this technology and the vulnerabilities caused by its deployment.
It is not mandatory for the firm to expand its threat assessment in highly specialised analysis on specifications and performance. The aim of this risk evaluation is to assess the ML and FT vulnerabilities and to recognise effective control designs required to mitigate and restrict the company's exposure.
If the company decides to approve the adoption and deployment of new technologies from an existing architecture, the board must accept the risk assessment undertaken, and the approvals shall be documented for future reference.
After conducting the first threat assessment of new or growing technologies, the company should regularly examine and review its
 
evaluation, obligation and inspection of its ML and FT operations, as explained in the Handbook.

Relationship Threat Assessment
Introduction
The section of the Handbook describes the standard practice and guidelines for risk assessment in a business contract. The connections between both parties involved in the transaction describe the core relationship between them.
The company's business risk evaluations and risk appetite can be used to evaluate its relationship agreement. The relationship threat assessment is the evaluation of new or existing business operations or trade contrary to the parameters determined within the firm's risk appetite and transactions identified in the company risk assessments.
There may be a situation where threats of ML and FT are significant, and ECDD control procedures must be enforced. Likewise, there may be circumstances where the company may deploy SCDD measures since it has evaluated and classified the company's operations or trade as low.

Control and Mitigation
The company shall consider a few parameters of risk exposure. The list is not limited to the following:
•	The firm shall conduct a relationship threat evaluation before approving any business relationship.
•	The Board must regularly review the relationship threat assessment to detect emerging trends and make appropriate adjustments.
The firm shall make an informed decision based on the outcome of its relationship threat assessment. The firm may decide to cancel
 
existing arrangements or notify the Commission of its findings, as stated in the Handbook.
Where the Board considers and reviews its relationship threat assessment, the firm shall test the business risk appetite and threat factors based on:
•	Customers status and profile

•	The state or geographical area

•	The merchandise, service, trade and delivery station associated with the investment relationship or trade.
The company must consider other variables when evaluating a relationship threat assessment. The firm shall consider:
a.		Whether in which the merchandise or service provided has Life insurance coverage.
b.	The purpose of the business association.

c.	The worth, quantity, value and frequency of transactions.

d.	The anticipated duration of the association and business relationship.
The company's consideration of the client's status and profile should identify the investor's status, Links with MT or FT operations, or whether the customers are natural persons or have a Legal arrangement.
Where the firm reviews the relationship threat assessment, the board must place its risk factors above any other threat components.
Based on the aforementioned guideline, the firm shall consider all risk factors before evaluating its relationship threat assessment.
Trade, according to Commission Rule (3.75) should contain an assessment of the economic or business justification for the company associated with the client.
 
The company's processes can provide standardised profiles for its risk assessments where the board accepts its approach as efficient to handle the threat of business relationship or mutual trade.
However, where the company has a varied client base or a variety of products and services are available, the firm must create a more organised and rigorous method to demonstrate that the board exercised an informed decision.
The company must provide a transparent proof about the basis it conducted and evaluated the relationship threat assessment.
Where the company fails to identify and detect all the risk factors of the business operations due to some mitigating variables, the board shall report and document these mitigating obstacles in its operational database. Such documents will be used to evaluate the effectiveness of its policies and controls.
Depending on the outcome of the relationship threat assessment, the company has to decide:
a.	The scope of the identification data to be accessed on the principals of each trade operation and exchange.
b.	How to verify each classification data

c.	How to deploy SCDD control procedures where at which the firm's investment transactions were evaluated as being low risk and exhibits poor compliance.
d.	The level by which the company's business relationship should be tracked on a continuing basis.
Investments from Complex Reports and Instructions
The Commission announces investments from reports, advisory notices, press, which emphasise possible threats from specific nations, territories and geographical places. The information and sanction laws associated with the Channel Islands Handbook must be used when reviewing the relationship threat evaluation.
 
High-Risk Factors
In cases where the company must comply with CDD controls, it should execute ECDD steps because of the high-risk business associations and trades. The firm shall consider these processes without exception.
•	The investment connection or trade where the client or stakeholder is a politically exposed person (PEP).
•	Where the company is a financial service business, the business connection or link is described as:
o	A correspondent bank relationship.

o	A business investment that supplies solutions.


•	A business association or an investment trade.

Risk Factors
The risk factors contained within these sections are only for guidance and are supplied as examples of variables, which the company can consider when undertaking a relationship threat evaluation. These factors are not exhaustive and prescribed as a record. Therefore, the company shall estimate and determine what is right in the conditions of the business links or trade.
The examples do not prevent the company from deploying a risk­ based strategy.
The firm must have a holistic perspective of risk associated with a business relationship or trade as established in Section 3. The existence of isolated threats does not categorise the firm's operations as a Lower or higher risk. However, in agreement with Section 3, certain risk variables have a higher risk margin to the overall investment evaluation than others.
Where the firm establishes that some clients or their actions abuse ML or FT regulations, the compliance officer should enforce higher
 
risk management in AML and CFT. The risk strategy must be effective and appropriate to its variable.

Client Risk Factors
The board must consider several risk options associated with the clients and beneficial owners. The board must consider the threats related to:
•	The client's professional or business operations

•	The client's (and valuable owner's) status and integrity

•	The client's (and beneficial proprietor) character and behaviour.

Risk factors that must be evaluated when testing the client's business operations include:
a.		Does the client have links to businesses that are associated with higher risk variables such as building and estate investments, pharmaceuticals, weapons trade, and health care services, extractive businesses?
b.		Does the client have hyperlinks to businesses that are associated with higher ML or FT risk such as casinos?
c.	Does the client have connections or relationships with business investments that demand significantly?
d.		Where the client is an authorised person, what is the goal of their establishment?
e.		Does the client have any connection to some PEP such as directors PEPs? Do the activities of the PEPs exercise substantial control over the client or beneficial owner? Based on the regulations of Schedule 3, the board shall employ ECDD steps.
f.		Does the client or investor occupy a notable position or influential status, which may allow them to misuse the position for personal gain? For instance, are such official
 
government agents or ministers that could award contracts, business investment agreements, and decision-making associates of high-profile athletic bodies or policymakers?
g.	Is your client an authorised individual subject to regulatory conditions that guarantee reliable details regarding the client's personal transactions and trade?
h.	Is there proof that the client was sanctioned for failure to abide by AML and CFT guidelines?
i.		Does your client own a public liability investment or venture from a state or region with low levels of corruption?
j.	Is your client's history consistent? Are they grey areas that require clarification? What is your client's source of wealth?
The board shall consider the following risk factors when classifying the threat associated with a client's integrity and reputation.
Are there any media reports or other pertinent sources of information regarding the client? Are there claims of criminality or offences against the client? If the answer is yes, are such dependable and credible? The company shall determine the authenticity of accusations based on the sources and independence of the origin of such information.
The company must note that the lack of criminal convictions may not be enough to dismiss cases of fraud.
The firm shall determine whether the client or associates had their assets frozen because of illegitimate or administrative proceeding or accusations
Does the company proof to assume that the client or their associates had their accounts frozen for fraud?
Does the company have any information concerning the client's personal records, investments, and trade?
 
This risk factors could be relevant when evaluating the danger associated with a client's character and behaviour. The company must understand that evidence against some clients may be revealed after the business contracts have been signed. Therefore, compliance must adhere to specific control measures to detect and prevent fraudulent activities. The firm must reference these questions when considering the client's risk factors based on their behaviour.
•	Does the client have valid reasons for not showing their personal status? Is the client an asylum seeker?
•		Does the company have some doubts regarding the veracity or accuracy of their client's or personal and business status?
•		Are there any signs that the client might close any trade exchange or business transactions with the firm? Can the client avoid compliance issues with the firm?
•		Are your client's possession and control arrangement transparent, and does this make sense? If the client's possession and management structure are opaque or complex, is there a clear business or Legal rationale?
•	Is your client an authorised individual or Legal arrangement that could be applied as a private asset holding plan?
•	Will there be a solid reason for changes in the client's possession and management structure?
•		Does the consumer allow transactions that are complicated, unusual, or large or have an abnormal or unexpected pattern with no obvious economic or Lawful purpose and rationale? Are there any reasons to assume that the client is attempting to evade certain thresholds, like the ones subject to compulsory coverage?
•		Can the consumer enter needless or unreasonable heights of secrecy? Is the client reluctant to discuss identification
 
information, or do they disguise the authentic nature of their investments and operations?
•	Can the board establish and prove the client's source of wealth either through inheritance, contracts or business investments?
•		Can the consumer use unauthorised services and goods that failed the compliance test?
•	Is your client an NPO whose actions could be mistreated for FT functions?
Countries Risk Variables
The board must identify threats associated with the cline's links, regions, countries and geographical area.
The company must note that the character and goal of the business connection will often determine the significance of nations and geographic risk variables. For instance:
a.		Where the capital utilised in the investment connection or trade have been generated overseas, the degree of establishing offences in ML, FT and the efficiency of the nation's legal strategy will be relevant.
b.		Where funds have been obtained from or delivered to regions or countries where terrorist offences and activities are present, the company must investigate the extent of such activities, the character and purpose of the business links and trade.
c.		Where the client is still an FSB, the company should pay special attention to the adequacy of supervision.
d.		Where the client or beneficial stakeholder is an authorised person or lawful agent, the company should consider the degree to which the nation or territory where the client or beneficial shareholder is enrolled efficiently complies with global tax transparency criteria.
 
The company shall consider the following risk variables when classifying the efficiency of countries' AML and CFT program:
•		Has the nation been classified with mutual analysis as having tactical deficiencies in its CFT and AML programs? Based on the Schedule 3 regulations, the firm shall apply ECDD controls where the client or beneficial shareholder has a relevant link to a nation that does not deploy or insufficiently apply the FAAT regulations.
•		Are there sufficient and reliable source concerning the quality of and efficacy of regulatory authorities and supervision? Examples of credible resources include evaluation reports from the FATF regional figures. The firm must understand that a client's membership with FATF and other related agencies does not imply that the nation or territory's AML and CFT program is sufficient and powerful.
Risk variables the company should consider when differentiating the level of FT threat related to a state or location include:
•	is there reliable information implying that a nation or territory offers support or funding for terrorist actions?
•	Is the state subject to monetary sanctions, embargoes or processes associated with terrorism, funding of terrorism or proliferation issued by the UN?
Risk variables the company should consider when identifying a nation or territory's degree of transparency and taxation compliance include:
Will there be advice in more than one plausible and reliable resource, which the nation has been certified compliant with global tax transparency and data sharing criteria? Is there proof that applicable rules are implemented in practice?
Examples of data sources include reports from the International Forum on Transparency and OECD that measures tax obligations,
 
evaluations of the nation's devotion to exchange of data-dependent on the regional figures and IMF assessments.
Has the nation been dedicated to and efficiently executed the report standard act enacted and adopted by the G20 in 2014?
Does the nation have reliable and reachable beneficial customer's registers?
Risk factors the company should consider when identifying threats associated with the level of established offences to FT and ML in a geographical area include:
•	Will there be advice from reputable public resources concerning the level of offences to FT and ML such as corruption, organised crime and tax fraud? Sources of the reports include corruption indices, OECD reports about the execution of the anti-bribery conference and the UN.
•	Will there be advice from a reliable source concerning the potential of the nation's judicial and investigative procedure to efficiently investigate and prosecute these offences?
Goods and Services Threat Factors
When identifying threats related to goods, services or trades, the company should classify risks associated with:
1.	The degree of transparency or opaqueness this item, service or trade represents.
2.	The complexity of goods, support or trade.

3.	The size or value of goods, services or trade.

Risk variables that may be applicable when categorising threats associated with a commodity, service or trade transparency include:
•	Do client's goods or services permit them to stay anonymous or conceal their identity? Examples of these services comprise
 
bearer stocks, fiduciary payments, individual asset holding vehicles, or legal instructions that operate behind the scenes.
•	To what degree can third party associates in a business agreement or transaction make decisions?
Risk variables that may be applicable when classifying threats associated with a commodity, service or trade include:
•		What is the degree of complexity of the investment transactions? Are there multiple parties in the business transaction?
•		Can the business permit payments from third parties and even overpayment? Where third party obligations are anticipated, does the company identify and customer profile? Do transfers subject to AML and CFT standards fund services and goods?
•	Can the company measure threats to its brand or innovative service?
Risk factors that may be applicable when classifying threats associated with a commodity, service size include:
1.	What are the methods of payments for goods and services? Does the transaction allow multiple account payments?
2.	To what extent would the products facilitate or promote high­ value trades? Are there any limits on trade values or amounts of premium that may prevent the usage of the solution or support for both ML and FT functions?
Logistics Channel Risk Variables
The company shall consider the following obligations when categorising the threat associated with goods delivery and shipment:
•	The level by which transactions are conducted anonymously

•	The number of silent investors or intermediaries the company might use to secure and delivery products.
 
The company shall consider the following obligations when categorising the threat associated with service delivery and shipment:
a.		Can customers be identified during the delivery process? What strategy is in place to identify anonymous clients? Has the firm taken measures to avoid impersonation or identity fraud?
b.		Has the client been represented with another associate of the same financial category? If yes, to what extent may the company rely upon this launch as the satisfaction that the client will not introduce the company to excess ML or FT threat? What has the company done to show they use COD measures?
c.	Has the client been represented with a third party? What has the company done to show that: (i) The third-party associates employs COD steps and retains records based on the FATF standards.
1.	The third party and associates must provide copies of personal identification in accordance with the guidelines of the Handbook.
2.	The grade or status of business associates and the third party's COD standards are effective and valid.

d.	Has the client been introduced via an agent, in other words, without immediate company contact? What evidence does the company have to show that the broker has information the company knows its client and the threat linked to the business enterprise?
e.	When the agents or brokers are used, to what extent have they engaged in the firm's daily transaction? How does such information influence the firm's strategy on customer identification and threat assessment?
 
f.	Where the company accepts business brokers; is there evidence of compliance with AML laws?
Customer Due Diligence
Introduction
The use of customer due diligence (CDD) steps to company relationships and operations vital for two reasons:
•	To assist the company, verify the client's claims of personality, profile, business investment and compliance. CDD measures provide a direct link to evaluate third party associates or issues of legal barriers against the business relationship.
•	To assist security institutions and law enforcement agencies with information about their clients. Such information will be used to investigate cases of non-compliance and fraud.
This section highlights the Commission rules and supplies advice about CDD techniques to be implemented in a business relationships and operations. The section provides policies, controls and procedures needed by the company to satisfy the requirements of Schedule 3.
The material of the Chapter ought to be read in combination with the subsequent three chapters: 5. Natural Clients; 6. Accreditation; and seven. Legal Counsel and Legal Contracts. These chapters establish the CDD measures to be implemented based on the sort of client transaction.
Reference must be made in chapters 8 and 9 because the sections provide details of ECDD steps for high-risk transactions and improved measures for people that have particular higher risk variables. The chapter also highlights the conditions where the company can employ SCDD strategies and features of such measurement.

Overriding Obligations
 
In accordance with the regulations of this handbook, the company shall apply customer due diligence when:
•	Setting a firm relationship

•	Conducting a business transaction

•	The firm suspects or has a proof of suspecting:

o	Its clients and beneficial owners are engaged in ML or FT operations.
o	That customers are engaged in transactions as a third party for individuals who operate ML activities.

In accordance with the rule of this Handbook, where the company:

•	Creates a theory of conspiracy of ML or FT activities with a client or investor
•		And believes that enforcing the COD measures will expose their actions, the firm shall suspend the process, but will rather make a disclosure pursuant to Section I of the terrorism law.
Where the company is a payment service provider, it is necessary to employ COD controls when executing transactions via cable transfers from the conditions detailed in Chapter 14 of the Channel Islands Handbook.
In relation to clients, investors and beneficial owners the company shall:
1.	Reject and avoid creating business accounts with fictitious and anonymous identification names.
2.	Keep accounts in accordance with the demands and requirements of Schedule 3 and the Commission Rules.
3.	Take steps to prevent any business transaction with shell banks or financial houses.
 
4.	Take appropriate steps to ensure the institution does keep a correspondent banking connection in which the respondent bank is proven to allow its accounts for a shell Lender.
Effective CDD policies and processes are critical components of a successful AML and CFT structure and are critical for the company because they:
1.		Constitute a dynamic part of risk management, giving the foundation to identify, assess, detect, prevent and manage business risks.
2.	Assist to protect the company by reducing the likelihood of using the organisations as a tool or channel for crime, money Laundering and financing terrorism.
3.		Assist the company to maintain the business conditions of client and third parties within a business connection or trade, since the board can verify their identities and supply them with the solution or service requested.
4.	Assist the company to recognise variables that are uncommon and can detect abnormal transactions that are linked with money Laundering or FT operations.
Thus, CDD is a continuing and accumulative process, the extent of which depends on the threat and specific conditions of a business connection or trade.

Key Principals
Paragraph 4 of Schedule 3 defines the four categories of third parties associated with the business connection or trade (mutually known in the Handbook as "key flaws") and sets out the manner the CDD steps must be applied to each classification.
a.	The Client

b.	The third party associate that could act on behalf of the customer
 
c.	The beneficial investor of the customer

d.	The third party who acts on behalf of the beneficial investor.

The Client
The firm shall identify the dine using different classifications tools and strategies to verify their profile and status.
Chapters 7 and 5 of the Channel Islands Handbook show how to enforce the CDD measures where the client is a natural person, or even an authorised person and lawful contract.

A Third Party Claiming to Act on behalf of the Client
In accordance with the regulations of Schedule 3, any person or third party calming to act on behalf of a client shall be classified. The authority to act and identity of such associate must be verified before approving the transactions. The client shall be recognised and that individual's identity and ability to act will be confirmed.
Examples of third party agents include a natural person, authorised signatories (or equivalent) acting for or on behalf of an authorised investor or legal structure, agents with the powers of attorney, supervisors (or equivalent) that are acting on behalf of a legal individual and those acting on behalf of the client in a company relationship or mutual trade.
In taking steps to verify the profile and identity of any individual claiming to act on behalf of their client, the company should consider the threat posed by the business relationship, the materiality of the jurisdiction assigned to the associate and effect of a third party issuing instructions on funds transfer or assets delivery.
Examples of controls the company might choose to verify the ability of an individual to act on behalf of their client include a copy of their authorised signatories, power of attorney or other jurisdiction or
 
mandate providing the individual who has the capacity to act on behalf of their investors.
The identification and confirmation of the identity of each individual identified according to Handbook shall be completed in accordance with chapter 5 of the Channel Islands rules.

The Beneficial Investor of the Customer
Reasonable steps shall be required to confirm the third party identity utilising identification information and these measures will contain techniques to comprehend the ownership and management structure of the client.
The definition of a beneficial owner varies because of the class of Legal individual or lawful contract involved with the relationship or trade. Handbook.
The term 'reasonable steps' implies deploying strategies that are commensurate with the ML and FT activities, which have been identified within the business relationship or trade, to verify the ownership and management structure of the client and confirm the third party agent who acts on behalf of the client.
Where the business link or trade is a high-risk operation, the steps to comprehend the ownership and management structure of the client will be higher than usual for low risk transactions. Such activities might require the company to collect detailed data about the client regarding the business ownership. Likewise, measures regarded as reasonable to confirm the identity of this beneficial investor or associate with be higher for a high-risk operation and might require the company to undertake strict tests on the investor or acquire a robust identification detect and prevent transactions that facilitate money laundering activities.
 
The Third Party who Acts on behalf of the Beneficial Investor
The firm shall determine if the client is acting on behalf of an associate. The board shall implement measures to recognise the other person and acquire sufficient identification information.
The term 'reasonable measures' means taking steps that commensurate with the ML and FT threats which have been identified in its transactions and trade. The company must identify and classify the third party on whose behalf that the company has decided that the customer represents. Where the threat assessment is high, the firm shall adopt strict adherence to detect and prevent risk outcomes and vulnerabilities.
The company should consult with the CDD steps of the Handbook to deal with challenges that fall within this category.

Guidelines, Strategies and Controls
The company must adopt effective guidelines, controls and measures in area, which describe how to Label and check the identity of the client, beneficial shareholder and other important flaws of operations, business transactions and investments.
The company must evaluate based on risk analysis, how much identification info to collect, what to confirm, and how to confirm it, to ensure they gather necessary evidence on the identity of the client, beneficial investor or other crucial principal.
The company's guidelines, processes and controls concerning its CDD steps must:
•		Be risk-based oriented to distinguish between what is expected in Low threat transactions and high threat relationships and what to expect in situations that are neither high threat nor low risk.
 
•	Permit improved measures to be implemented in the situation where such steps are required in accordance with Schedule 3.
•	Cause the Least weight for clients, beneficial investors and other agents as approved in the Channel Islands Handbook.
•	Not curtail access to financial services such as Licences or passports.
•		React rationally to special groups that require attention and good conduct. The term special groups refer to foreign students or the elderly.
Identification data supplying evidence to confirm address and identity may come from different sources such as physical or electronic records, databases and digital resources. All these Sources may vary in their ethics, suitability, reliability and autonomy. For example, some identification information can be supplied by authorities after due diligence was undertaken in a risk assessment via federal identification cards and passports, though other identification info could be used to carry out the investigation.
The company should consider the appropriateness of identification information before its approval, such as its origin and if identity checks were conducted by the regulatory authority or issuing body. The company must also consider the vulnerability of a record to forgery when deciding its acceptability.
Where the company cannot access the physical documentation utilised to confirm the client's identity or a replicate certification is supplied, the board must ensure the records are verified and certified by an appropriate third party.
Additional advice about the strategies, controls and processes needed to certify the client and business investor are found in Chapter 6 of the Handbook.
Where the company Lacks knowledge of the identification information obtained to confirm identity of the customer,
 
appropriate steps must be undertaken to show that the identification data is real. Proof of the actions taken by the company must be stored as evidence of understanding and decisions concerning the files obtained.
All important files (or parts thereof) have to be known by an employee of the company and that understanding needs to be recorded and stored in the appropriate file.
The translation of the proof of actions must be evaluated on a case by cases basis since the compliance officer may have a different meaning to each case file and data. The company should document its comprehension of the record and where applicable the reason not to interpret the information.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned process, the company shall translate all important files (or parts thereof) at the request of an authorised institution or Commission.
Where identification information approved by the company to verify the identity of the beneficial owner or investor contains the individual's signature or a photo, the company must ensure that copies of each document is retrieved and stored for reference purposes.

Timing
The documentation and verification of the customer's status and profile must be conducted before establishing a business relationship or transaction. The verification process shall follow the guidelines in the Channel Islands Handbook.
There may be instances where the verification of identity cannot be completed before the business investment or transactions are established. The firm has the mandate to allow such likelihood, given that the board is satisfied with the reasons for the delay
 
Identify verification of customers and beneficial stakeholders must be completed after the institution of a business relationship. Such evaluation shall be conducted after the board might have assess the risk assessment template for each transaction. It is important to note that:
1.	The confirmation shall be done after the Board's approval.

2.	The requirement to confirm the client's identity shall not disrupt the ordinary conduct of business.
3.		Effective guidelines, controls and procedures must be enforced to mitigate exposures from transactions without restriction, number, forms and/or volume of trades, which may be achieved, or the observation of intricate contacts being transported beyond the expected norms of investment and trade.
The regulations of this Handbook does not permit reconsidering documentation of customers or beneficial stakeholder after the commencement of business activities, except where beneficiaries have been Identified by category and are unknown to the company at the initiation of operations.
Where the confirmation of the identity of a client occurs after the business connection, the company should have proper and effective guidelines, controls and procedures to handle the risk arising from the delay. The firm's regulations, strategies, controls and procedures should include:
•	Demonstrating that it is not a high risk transaction

•		Observing the business relationship to guarantee that each confirmation of identity is completed during the business transactions.
•	Ensuring capital obtained cannot be passed to third parties.

The company must know that there may be events where the conditions are such that a business transaction was created or trade
 
was completed and the identification and confirmation processes was not completed. Under such situations, the board must refer to section 4.7 of the Channel Islands Handbook
With respect to periodic trades, if the identification of the client is understood, confirmation of identity is not compulsory in cases where payments are below £10,000 (whether independently or connected), except situations when it shows that two different transactions under the minimum threshold are linked to form a substantial one-time trade.

Business Acquisition and Clients
There may be situation in which the company acquires another established business with based associations or profiting out of a predetermined company, or non-Bailiwick institution or a list of customers in the Bailiwick.
Before buying the organisation or group of clients, the company should run enquiries on the seller to establish the amount and the appropriateness of identification information concerning the clients of the specified investment or firm.
Where deficiencies at the identification information are recognised, the company has to determine and execute effective reforms to mitigate its impact deficiency. The company must inform the Commission on its adjustments as stipulated in the Channel Islands Handbook.
Along with conducting due diligence on the seller, the company can rely on the documentation and data previously accessed by the merchant for its customers and relationships in which the following standards are fulfilled:
1.	The seller is the Appendix C firm

2.	That the company has assessed the customer due diligence guidelines, controls and measures operated by the seller were
 
acceptable, such as account of the findings of some applicable testimonials by the Commission and other regulatory bodies.
3.	The company collected identification information (or copies) for every business relationship.
Where the company removes the databases of a specified business, the board shall adhere to the record requirements as stipulated in the Channel Islands Handbook.

Failure with Customer Due Diligence
Based on Paragraph 9 of Schedule 3, where the company could not comply with the requirements of CDD, the board shall:
•	Terminate or close the existing business investment.

•		Reject the approval of a new business entity, customers, legal arrangement or third party investor.
•		Consider whether the board will notify the Commission and make a full disclosure based on the guidelines in the Channel Islands Handbook.
It should be noted that the closure and termination of a business operation might be difficult because of the legal or contractual reasons beyond the control of the company. The timing of this decision for an established investment may depend on the character of the inherent properties or solutions. For example, while a financial institution may close an account and return the client's funds, the mandatory redemption of an investment at a collective investment scheme especially where it is rigid or the evaluation dates are infrequent, can be debatable.
Where a business termination cannot be concluded, (for instance, when the company loses contact with the client) the company should enforce controls and procedures secure, suspend and block its resources and money until the business connection with the
 
customers are established or the organisations has implemented the policy act on dormant accounts.
Where the business closure or investment termination is not possible, for whatever motive, the company handles and mitigates the business risk efficiently until when the investment relationship could be resumed.
Where funds have been obtained, the firm shall return such funds to its origin whether or not the source is a natural person or third party investor. Where the company cannot return the money to its source, for example, where the lending bank has been terminated,
the company must take proper measures to return the capital to the exact same party in a different form.
Where it is not possible to return the funds to the customer (if the applicable party no longer exists), the company shall return such funds to an appropriate third party and record the justification for those actions taken.
Where the company has been closed and cannot create a business transaction or trade, the firm must evaluate the conditions for such collapse and inability to enforce the COD steps and if these justify a disclosure process to the FIS.

Shared Investment Schemes Duty for Investor CDD
As part of the modality for authorisation of a close investment scheme, the board shall nominated company that is licensed under POI Law to fulfil the requirements of Schedule 3 and the Channel Islands Handbook for investors.
The nominated company must notify the Commission that it has been selected for the application procedure before the authorisation of their CIS.
 
The nominated company should treat all investors to the CIS as customers and guarantee the applicable provisions of Schedule 3 are fulfilled. For example, testing relationship risk, distinguishing and confirming the personality of depositors, shareholders, beneficial shareholders and other important principals.
While the utilisation of CDD steps could be performed by a third party the nominated company shall be liable for ensuring appropriate identification data are documented for shareholders as it satisfies the applicable requirements of Strategy 3 and the regulations of the Channel Islands Handbook.
Where the nominated company provides solutions to some CIS, the traded stocks on the exchange platform must be done in accordance with the requirements of the Channel Islands Handbook.
Where the company provides services to some CIS and has not been nominated under Paragraph 4.57, the company shall serve the CIS as its client and conduct the CDD prerequisites to obtain a CIS authorisation by the Commission.
There may be events where the nominated company will change during the business relationship of a CIS, for example, the consequence of a reversal of designated supervisor. Where the company becomes the nominated company, the board must notify the Commission of its placement after approval.
Where the company is nominated with previous investors, the board shall consider the requirements of the Channel Islands Handbook.
Notifications created according to Commission Rule 4.63 shall be filed through the submission portal.

Assessing and Verifying the Identity of in CIS
This part details the duties for the adoption of CDD steps to investors and applies where the company:
 
•	Has been selected in accordance with paragraph 4.57 of the Channel Islands Handbook.
•	Is acting as a supervisor or a third party of a non-Guernsey collective investment scheme?
The fundamentals the COD duties for a CIS shareholder is an understanding that the inclusive agreements in which interests at a CIS are provided to investors will ascertain the COD Steps to be implemented.
When undertaking its duties, the company shall evaluate the vulnerabilities of CISs and the methods in which customers might compromise the CISs for ML or FT activities. The cases or scenario includes:
1.	CISs are dispersed using a point-to-point communication foundation, using those CISs comparatively measures and the capacity to transfer business holdings between various parties.
2.	OECISs, especially those with regular (weekly or daily) business operations can offer reduced holding time and higher turnover ratio.
3.		Regardless of demands for the long-term character of CISs that leads to restricted ML functions, the modalities of use might appeal to money launderers because of the capacity to create income and growth.
The firm shall categorise investment into four categories, with each representing specific threats and its obligations about the COD measures to be implemented. The evaluation shows the party that requires management analysis for every category of business.
The strategy of investment associate to be viewed as a Client

a.		Where legal or natural associate or an authorised investor buys shares in a CIS in their own accounts, rather than on behalf of
 
additional parties, the company shall convert the investor to a customer and apply CDD controls.
b.		An investor who within its economic action buys the components of stocks or shares in a CIS and exercises control within the investment to the advantage of a third party, where the investment is an Appendix C firm acting as an intermediary, the company shall treat the investors as a client provided its risk assessment is low. The regulations of this disclosure shall be carried out in accordance with the rules in the Channel Islands Handbook.
c.		A business client that operates with its name and registered proprietor of shares but takes instructions for third parties will have its funds returned to the enrolled or beneficial owner of those units or shares at the CIS.
d.		A company's client, for example, a fiscal intermediary's client, in which the business enterprise is not the registered proprietor of the stocks, the company shall treat the investors as their clients and enforce CDD to the buyer, such as the beneficial shareholder in accordance with all the requirements of Schedule 3. Where the customer fulfils the definition of the Appendix C industry, the company could consider fixing the intermediary as an introducer in accordance with the demands of the Channel Islands Handbook.
CIS Traded on a Listed Market
This section pertains to authorised and enrolled CECISs, included as employers, whose stocks listed on a recognised stock exchange or other publicly held firms.
This strategy is recognised by IOSCO in its AML Guidance for CIS issued in October 2005 that says: closed stocks or shares or Listed CIS and public businesses or financial institutions do not have specific anti-money laundering obligations.
 
With respect to publicly listed firms, the FATF reveals its position on the conduct of listed stocks in its method of evaluating technical compliance with the FATF recommendations and the potency of AML/CFT systems dated February 2013 that states:
Where the customer or proprietor of the listed stock and subject to regulation demands (either from stock market rules or via beneficial ownership) is the major shareholder of the business, it is not compulsory to verify or classify the identity of the client or beneficial investor of these companies. The appropriate identification information can be obtained from a general register, from the client or by other trusted sources.
The board must understand that the stocks of some traded CECIS cannot be sold directly to shareholders, but are issued, distributed and exchanged through brokers, merchants, market intermediaries and investors. Therefore, a listed CECIS and a nominated company cannot interact with investors before accepting an investment or approving a corporate activity such as share or dividend distribution.
Where the CECIS are listed on a recognised market, it is not compulsory for the company nominated by the CECIS under Paragraph 4.57 to classify and verify the identity of shareholders.
Where the company was nominated in accordance with the Channel Islands Handbook, the board must acknowledge the procedures to enter the CECIS and consider the threat introduced by the scheme as stipulated in Schedule 3 of the Handbook.

Enhanced Customer Due Diligence
Aims
This section considers market relationships and trades evaluated by the company as:
•	Introducing a higher risk of ML or FT while considering the requirements of Paragraph 3 and the regulations of the
 
Commission.

•	Involving more than one risk variables as highlighted in the Channel Islands Handbook.
The firm shall test and assess the appropriate CDD measures to implement.
In cases where the company shall execute CDD measures, it must deploy ECDD based on high-risk business associations and trades. In accordance with the guidelines in the Channel Islands Handbook and Schedule 3, the firm shall consider:
•		An investment or business transaction where the client or investor is a politically exposed person.
•	The situation where the company is a financial service business or an investment relationship, which is:
0	A correspondent bank association

o	An investment business that involves the supply of solutions by a single FSB to different customers as stipulated in the Channel Islands Handbook.

•	A business transaction or trade operations:

0		In which the client or beneficial investor has a link connection with a nation that:
o	Offers support or funding for terrorist actions or does not enforce the FATF recommendations.
o	Is identified as a nation where such control is effective and appropriate. The board must deploy its control measures where:

o	It considers the firm a high-risk operation. The board shall issue regular warnings, press statements and notices
 
based on the requirements of the Channel Islands Handbook and the NRA.
•	Business operations or trade that has been evaluated as a high-risk transaction.
•		A business connection or trade where the client, the valuable owner of the client, or some other authorised person from the possession or control arrangement that has warrants or shares.
The firm must use enhance strategies and controls on all business transactions whether they are prioritised as high threat, low threat operations or relates to:
•	A customer who is not resident in the location of the business

•	The supply of personal banking solutions

•		A client who is an authorised person and can be used for private holding investments.
•	A client that is:

0	An authorised person using nominee shareholders

o Managed by a nominated person which shareholders as stipulated in the Channel Islands Handbook.

The obligations for this section require that ECDD steps be implemented in most high-risk operations. The need to employ advanced or enhanced measures to mitigate specific higher-risk variables as set out in Paragraph 5(2) of Schedule 3 applies to investment links or trades from low to higher threat value.
The availability of many risk variables as listed in Schedule 3 may not automatically equate to a higher risk for the transaction or business operation as being large. Based on the regulations of the Channel Islands Handbook, the company must consider the accumulative impact of all threat variables and its influence on the business relationship or transactions and operations.
 
Strategies, Approaches and Controls Enhanced Customer due Diligence Measures (High threat operations)
The company must permit effective techniques, controls and procedures follow ECDD Steps in which the company has approved, considering the conditions and demands of the trade or business transaction.
In accordance with the regulations in Schedule 3 and the Channel Islands Handbook, ECDD shall mean:
•	Procuring management approval prior to business investment or trade.
•	Procuring management approval to facilitate and continue operations with an existing business investment of a foreign PEP.
•	Implementing effective control systems to evaluate and ascertain the source of payments and funds from:
o	The client

o	The beneficial investor


•		Conducting regular analysis, observation, evaluation and applying selective checks on prioritised transactions or trade in accordance with the regulations in the Channel Islands Handbook.
•	Implementing one or more of the following controls as appropriate for the trade or business operation.
0		Acquiring information about the client personal details such as the volume and worth of their assets or beneficial owners.
0	Affirming additional aspects of the client's identity.
 
o	Acquiring additional information to comprehend the purpose and character of the business relationship and mutual trade.
o	Taking effective steps to establish and understand the origin of funds in accordance with Schedule 3.
The company shall take the following steps in accordance with Schedule 3:
1.		Broadening the company's knowledge of their purpose and operations by collecting information on the explanations for its transactions and deliverables.
2.		Authorising independent study by a professional firm or adviser pertaining the business and showing requirements of each transaction via links with the client or beneficial investor.
3.	Where the client is an authorised person, identifying and confirming that the identity of supervisors and other managing officials are accurate and in accordance with the recommendations of the Channel Islands Handbook.
4.		Acquiring information from staff offices or representatives located in a jurisdiction where the client has a business relationship.
The firm shall consider the following ECDD steps to tackle certain threats originating from a high threat assessment:
•	In cases of existing market investments, where the board considers its risk assessment as high priority, the firm must obtain a senior management endorsement for any payment operation.
•	The initial payment shall be performed through an account in the client's name with an Appendix C enterprise.
Enhanced Measures (High threat variables)
 
The company's strategies, controls and guidelines shall require the execution of enhanced steps as detailed in the Handbook.
Where there is more than one threat factor in a business transaction, the company shall apply effective measures to mitigate each risk variable found within the business enterprise or trade.

ECDD measures for High Threat Factors
There may also be situations where a large risk relationship is detected during payment, and the firm shall employ ECDD steps and implement appropriate enhanced steps to mitigate the threat factors.
Based on Commission Rule 8.12, enhanced measures applied should be unique to higher risk variable(s) within a business link or trade.
However, there might be scenarios where an enhanced step taken handles different threat variables or the ECDD measures implemented by the company also mitigate a higher risk variable(s).
For instance, the firm could provide private banking solutions to a foreign PEP client and the board is satisfied that the ECDD measures employed for a PEP are effective and appropriate to mitigate the threat associated with the banking solutions.
The guidelines, controls and measures of this company shall facilitate the threat assessment analysis of prioritised risk variables. The strategy permits the placement of appropriate and enhanced measures suitable to mitigate the risks identified.

Source of Business Funds and Wealth
The board shall implement reasonable measures to understand the origin of payments made during investments, trade and business operations. In accordance with the regulations of the Channel Islands Handbook and Schedule 3, the firm shall investigate the funds of
 
•	The client

•	The business owner who may be a politically exposed person
(PEP).

The enforcement of appropriate control measures to establish and determine the client's source of wealth and the steps to establish how the funds are used within the business relationship are significant facets of due diligence procedure. These measures help the company in showing that such funds are not proceeds from money laundering activities and are consistent with the company's understanding of the client, the beneficial owner and the essence of its business relationship or trade.
The company must deploy effective ECDD control systems and policies to ascertain the origin of any capital and wealth of the customer, beneficial investor or third party. In accordance with Schedule 3, the firm shall conduct regular checks to verify the effectiveness of each ECDD control and determine its impact on mitigating higher risk factors in a business relationship.
The origin of funds refers to the action, which created specific funding for business or trade. Source of wealth differs from the origin of capital, and it describes the actions that created the net value of the client or beneficial investor, both internal or external transactions and operations.
The company shall ascertain the origin of funds and wealth, record and document the proof of the risk assessment analysis on the implications of the client's source of funding, geographical location and the spare of business operations that generate revenue.
In evaluating what constitutes 'reasonable measures' to investigate the client's source of wealth, the company shall consider specific risk factors within the business operations and its appraisal. The list of risk factors to consider in the analysis is not limited to the following but include the form and complexity of the client or
 
beneficial investor, the client's economic activity, occupation and the motive of the services supplied by the business.
Data on the origin of wealth and business financing can be retrieved from the investors or beneficial owner, and the magnitude to which such information collaborates shall be commensurate with the threat. However, the company can manage an investment where it could prove the source of funding without corroborating the information since it satisfies the understanding about the investment or trade and the threat assessment are comparatively low and commensurate with goods or services of the investing firm.
The company may have a natural customer situated in its authority while using its products or solutions to get a comparatively small capital, which makes it a higher risk connection or geographical risk. In this scenario, placing reliance on the data provided by the client on the origin of wealth and funds as part of the company's ECDD measures can be regarded as 'reasonable'. This assumption is true because it agrees with the knowledge and information about the client through COD steps, ECDD controls and the enhanced methods of evaluation.
The term 'reasonable measures' provides collaborating client data where he or she is a citizen of a high-risk state, and the sources of wealth cannot be easily verified or assessed in accordance with the structures and policies of the Channel Islands Handbook.
The level by which the company corroborates the client's identification data is a function of its threat assessment rather than a universal approach. Where corroboration of the client's information is demanded, the company shall apply one of the following options:
a.	Commissioning a different and dependable report from a professional agency.
b.		Acquiring sensitive collaboration information such as investment agreement, contract deeds and payment voucher.
 
c.	Where the company operates as a group, retrieving reliable data from different members, the investment is compulsory.
d.		Where the company operates with a third party, the board shall gather relevant information from trusted sources.
e.		Where the customer was nominated or introduced to the company, the board shall collect relevant information from the introducer.
f.	Where data is publicly accessible through paid databases, receiving advice from a trusted private or third party source is compulsory.
g.	The firm shall acquire financial statements and audited reports from relevant data agencies.
It would be inappropriate for the company to use the client's response to the application form, considering that such answers could be vague and incomplete. The firm shall seek confirmation of all relevant data before permitting the business relationship. The firms must collaborate with the client's source of wealth and other vital information.
Likewise establishing the origin of capital involved in the investment operations cannot be restricted to bank transfers and deposit locations. The actions taken by the company shall be purposeful and attempt to establish the source of capital and the reason such funds were obtained.
The duty to enforce measures to ascertain the origin of capital goes beyond the initiation of trade or business relationship. Monitoring arrangements should consist of checking if the company's business relationship represents the threat assessment status of the investment.

Relationship between SCDD and Enhanced Measures
 
It is possible to employ SCDD steps to various business operations as stipulated in the Channel Islands Manual. The firm shall apply enhanced measures to mitigate the business risk assessment.
Where the company evaluates the client's ML and FT operations to be low, they shall enforce SCDD control mechanism to a natural resident with a private asset-holding vehicle, provided the company implements an enhanced procedure to satisfy that the deployment of a private asset holding is authentic and legitimate.
It is normal for the company to apply SCDD controls where it proves that the threat assessment of ML and FT danger too low provided an enhanced procedure would be used to mitigate the threat connected to a non-resident client. For example, to ascertain and understand why an Appendix C company is receiving professional services from the Bailiwick rather than at its home authority.

Politically Exposed Persons (PEP) Introduction
Because of their influence and position, politically exposed clients could misuse their positions to facilitate ML offences, such as inducement, corruption or running operations associated with FT. Where a PEP includes links to nations or business industries where corruption is more prevalent, the risk is further improved.
PEP standing itself does not incriminate people or their partners and related associates. However, being a politically exposed persons means the client or beneficial investor shall be evaluated with ECDD steps, and a national PEP or global organisation must be subjected to ECDD procedures to determine the threat assessment of each transaction and business operation.
There are no specific methods of employing ECDD steps for exposed persons. The goal of this measure will be contrasted with the kind of
 
PEP, the threat identified, the essence of the PEP's position and capability to affect the business relationship.

Identifying Politically Exposed Persons
In accordance with the requirements of the Channel Islands Handbook, the company shall investigate the client or beneficial investors to ascertain if he or she is a politically exposed person. The firms shall classify customers as domestic, international or foreign PEP.
As mentioned above, the Channel Islands Handbook categorises PEP into three groups.
•	'Foreign PEP': A person who possesses a dominant status or appointed in a noble position of a nation or territory apart from the Bailiwick.
•	'Local PEP': a person who possesses a dominant public purpose, elected to act in the Bailiwick.
•	'Global organisation PEP': a person entrusted with a dominant role by a global organisation.
Based on the classification of PEP, a dominant role for a public function includes:
1.	Heads of government.

2.	Heads of political parties or senior politicians

3.	Heads of government institutions and senior colleagues

4.	Heads of the judiciary

5.	Senior army officials

6.	Heads of state-owned institutions and agencies

When categorising whether an individual's status represents the definition of a PEP, dominant or prominent must be translated as those individuals in positions of seniority from the regions covered
 
by Paragraph 8.37. Other rankings or junior directors are excluded by definition.
The term 'notable, dominant, or prominent' cannot be classified as a degree of seniority, which activates the necessity to categorise a PEP based on a variety of variables that include the function held by the person, the distinct Legislative framework of the government or organisation involved, and the powers, duties impact of specific status.
The board must refer to the regulations of the Channel Islands while identifying a politically exposes person. Based on the guidelines of the Handbook, a person cannot be classified as a PEP when the individual:
•	Does not meet the criteria of a PEP as defined by the ML Act or FSB rules.
•	Relinquish or ceases to act as a prominent or entrusted member of the classified institutions.
The firm shall refer to Appendix E for Listing public positions that cover Local PEP. The individual shall cease to represent the term when removed from such public positions Listed in Appendix E. the firm cannot represent such natural persons in the risk relationship assessment when they cease to hold prominent public positions.
The government in other authorities can publish Lists comparable to Appendix E of natural persons categorised within the definition of a PEP. The classification permits the company to classify an investor as a PEP. Consequently, these classes will depend on the recommendations in chapter 8 and the risk assessment of other variables.
In deciding whether an investor or proprietor is a PEP, the company could contemplate:
a.		Whether to use templates of the UK, US, EU on corruption and financial fraud to investigate if a client or owner, is a Legal or
 
natural person who occupies a dominant public role in a foreign state or territory, or international institution.
b.	Whether to corruption or fraud templates of Guernsey or Alderney to investigate if a client or beneficial investor is a legal or natural individual whose is a current holder of a dominant public role in the Bailiwick.
c.	Searching for confirmation by a client or investors with an application format question if they hold a dominant public function or government position within the Bailiwick or, local, or international affiliation.
d.	Using valid databases to search and identify the role or status of the investors, natural person or shareholder.
Where the company determines that someone who is the client or beneficial investor in a business relationship or intermittent trade is an international PEP, it will execute ECDD concerning that company relationship or business transaction.
Where the company identifies a client or value investor is a national or global organisation PEP, the board shall collect sufficient information to comprehend the characteristics of the public function, which the natural person was entrusted and evaluate its threat assessment in compliance with Paragraph 3 of the Channel Islands Handbook.
Where the firm believes the investment operations have been categorised as a high-risk transaction, the board must employ ECDD steps in accordance with the regulations of the Channel Islands Handbook.
Where the company concludes that the transaction or trade with the local or global PEP does not pose a higher threat, it is not compulsory to employ ECDD steps, assuming the company has implemented SCDD or CDD controls and some other enhanced procedures required according to Paragraph 5(2) of the Handbook.
 
Where the company classifies the foreign PEP as a manager acting or purporting to act for a customer and does not fall within the definition of proprietor the company should include in its threat analysis the essence of this PEP's function and reason for the public status.
Where the company has decided as part of its own relationship risk evaluation that its transaction or trade may pose several risk outcomes, the board could employ CDD controls and enhanced procedures based on the threat demand.
For example, a foreign retirement scheme investing to a CIS might have members who are PEPs, holding their own stance to the committee by virtue of the political situation and without the capability to exercise ultimate effective control within the retirement scheme. Such persons do not have a financial interest in the capital involved with the investment or operations, and the likelihood of using their connection to Launder assets, funds or the funding of terrorism is reduced.

International Organisation PEPs
The definition of PEPs involves a normal person who is or was entrusted with a dominant public role by a global organisation. The definition covers members of senior administration or people entrusted with equal functions such as supervisors, councillors and the board of directors.
The Handbook describes an international institution or firm as an entity:
•	That was created with a formal political arrangement between its member nations who has the standing of a global treaty
•	The presence that can be recognised by Legislation by its members
 
•	That cannot be described as a resident institutional component of the nation where it is situated.
Cases of global businesses as described in this Handbook include the UN, IMF, World Bank and NATO.
Global organisations such as the sports federations are exceptions to the definition in Schedule 3, but have similar payment and business transactions as international organisations; in such cases, the firm should implement ECDD measures where the threat assessment is high. The methods of implementation depend on the threat evaluation score of the business risk.

Family Members
The Company must detect and evaluate the possibility of abusing a family business transaction or intermittent trade with a relative of a PEP. The misuse or abuse of rights may include funds transfer of crime or facilitating the positioning and concealment of these profits without special relation to this PEP.
Based on the regulations of the ML and FT Act, the relative of any PEP shall comprise without limitation:
a.	A spouse

b.		A spouse, being a person who is regarded by the legislation of the nation or territory where the prominent role is entrusted as a partner
c.	Parents

d.	Children

e.	Father-in-law

f.	Grandchildren

The listing of relatives in the Channel Islands Handbook has no exception, and the board shall apply proactive measures or risk­ based approach to detect any anomalies within the immediate
 
family members. The evaluation and application of enhanced procedures depend on the societal, cultural and economic structure of the nation of the PEP. Consequently, the variation of people that qualify as immediate relatives is relative and conditional.
In determining who should be classified as an immediate relative of a PEP, the company should ascertain the impact and influence of the PEP on business operations and transactions. The firm must evaluate the level of threat via the relationship with the immediate relative.
The evaluation will cover factors like the effect of relatives on business transactions and the magnitude of their size. In certain cultures, the number of household members that are regarded as associates might be rather small, while in other circles, the list of family members might be huge and expand in many clans.

Business Associates
A business associate is considered as a client with close ties with investors or shareholder. A business associate is a client who could act on behalf of other investors in a market transaction.
Persons who qualify as business associates or partners include individuals that may not be grouped as immediate relatives. The list of business associates includes, but not limited to members of a political party, members of a civic organisation, labour or employee association as the PEP and company partners or partners, particularly the ones that share beneficial ownership of an authorised individual or legal arrangement.
Just like an immediate relative, the translation of whether a person could be a close partner or family relative depends upon the societal, cultural and economic context of their business connection.
 
Where the company determines that the client is an immediate relative or close partner of a national or global PEP, the board should handle that individual based on the requirements in Schedule 3 and the Channel Islands handbook. The grandchild of a national PEP ought to be treated under the provisions for national PEPs.

Former PEPs
On the likelihood for PEPs to use their status to facilitate financial fraud, the firm shall enforce the default recommendations for foreign PEPs. The firm shall apply ECDD measures as it relates to the client or beneficial owner.
Regardless of the above, there might be situations where the transaction involves individuals who held public portfolios and were deemed neutral or low-risk entity.
The flexibility regarding the interval by which all-natural persons must be categorised as PEPs shall be done in accordance with the Channel Islands Handbook. The declassification timescale for:
•	A foreign PEP cannot be declassified

•		For an international organisation PEP, they can never be declassified (however, family members of international PEPs can be declassified after seven years).
For a local PEP, the  declassification period is five years.

Details about the demands of PEPs are supplied within the subsequent sections establishing the measures to adopt for former PEP.
National PEPs, Family and Close Associates

The firm shall delist a national PEP rather five years after the individual ceased to hold the public role. The firm shall apply the rule when a senior director of the company satisfies that:
 
•	They know the source of the money or business transaction.

•	There is no justification to treat the client as a PEP.

For individuals that fall within the demands of Schedule 3, the company can declassify the client as a national PEP after a span of five decades. The date shall begin from the ay the customer or their associates relinquished any notable public role in the Bailiwick.
Where, through the course of operations, the client or investor becomes a former national PEP, account of the preceding function as a threat assessment is not mandatory, assuming the standards in Paragraph 8.69 are fulfilled.
Where the company identifies that its client was entrusted with a public role in the last five years, the company must consider such case as a variable when undertaking its threat evaluation in accordance with Commission's rule.
Global Organisation PEP and Close Associates

The company will declassify a global organisation PEP after seven years of holding a dominant role. Consequently, the senior director shall show and document records that:
1.	It comprehends the source of funds for the trade and transaction.
2.	There is no justification to treat the individual as a PEP. The requirements in Paragraph 8.73 do not apply to:
1.	The head of the global organisation.

2.		An individual with the power to guide the spending of significant amounts.
3.	Associates or family relatives that could at on behalf of the PEP about business investments.
In deciding whether a global organisation PEP falls within the definition as prescribed in the Channel Islands Handbook, the
 
company should consider if:

1.	The global organisation PEP has/had jurisdiction to assess assets, funds, resources, capital, policies or tasks of the firm.
2.	The global organisation PEP has/had accessibility, control or influence over cash flows and accounts of its business.
3.	The organisation PEP has/had control in awarding contracts or comparable projects for the firm.
For persons falling within the category as referenced in Paragraph 5(4)(b) of the Channel Islands Handbook, the company may declassify a client after seven years, which starts the day such an associate ceases to be a prominent or noble public holder.
Where through the course of a business connection the client or beneficial investor becomes a former global organisation PEP, the consideration of their preceding function as part of the threat analysis is not required if the board meets the requirements of the Commission.
Where the company identifies that the client or beneficial investor in a business relationship or trade held a public position within the global organisation in the last seven years, the board should consider such variable when undertaking its threat assessment according to Commission guidelines.
Foreign PEPs and Business Associates

The company shall declassify a foreign PEP who ceased to function as a public official after seven years provided a director of the company document a report that the organisation is satisfied that:
•	It establishes and knows the origin of the individual's wealth and the capital for investment.
•	There is no justification to treat the individual as a PEP.
 
Under the guidelines of Paragraph 8.79, the above provisions do not apply for:
•	A head of government or state

•	An individual with the power to regulate the spending of significant amounts
•	Individuals that act as a third party or relative on behalf of the PEP
In deciding whether a client can be classified as a foreign PEP, the firm shall consider if:
a.	The overseas PEP has/had accessibility, jurisdiction, control or influence on state resources policies or finance.
b.	The overseas PEP has/had control within regulatory powers to restrain mechanisms designed to prevent and discover ML or FT activities.
c.	The overseas PEP has/had control over contract approvals or acquisition.
d.	The overseas PEP has/had accessibility, jurisdiction and control over the state-owned businesses.
For all other overseas PEPs falling within the specified requirements, the company could declassify a natural person who is a foreign PEP after seven years. The date shall count from the day the affiliated overseas PEP, family relative or close associate relinquished his or her public position.
Where during the course of business operations, the client or beneficial investor ceases as a PEP, the company cannot enforce ECDD measures as described in the Channel Islands.
Where the company confirms that the beneficial investor still holds a public position, the board shall continue to assess each transaction in accordance with the regulations of the Channel
 
Islands Handbook. The firm shall treat the customers as a foreign
PEP.


Correspondent Relationships
Correspondent bank relationship is a business link that exists between one or more baking institutions. With the correspondent accounts, financial lending institutions could conduct business and supply services among their shareholders. Additionally, there are similar connections in different fields of the financial services industry.
Based on the definition, the company shall employ ECDD measures to a company relationship or trade that represents a correspondent banking service or comparable to such a connection since it supplies solutions to other lending institutions.
Based on the recommendations in Strategy 3, the company shall:

•	A correspondent banking relationship with a shell lender

•	Takes appropriate steps to detect and discontinue any business operation with a correspondent banking association that allows its account to be used by a shell lending investment.
The firm shall enforce the appropriate measures for transactions and operations associated with security trade and funds transfers. The company shall:
a.		Collect sufficient information regarding the reason for such transaction or funds transfer.
b.		Investigate the correspondent bank to ascertain its public standing and status. The firm shall also determine if the institution has been flagged for money laundering or FT activities.
c.	Evaluate the bank's CFT and AML mechanisms, policies, control procedures, regulations and operations to test its impact in
 
mitigating, detecting and preventing money laundering and financial crimes.
d.	Get board approval before instituting new correspondent links.

e.	Conduct an appraisal of the bank's CFT and AML policies and document them as reference materials.
Where a correspondent investment requires a third party account, the company must take appropriate actions to show that:
•	The client (the respondent establishment) complied with the mandatory CDD control procedures in accordance with the regulations of the Channel Islands Handbook.
•	That the respondent establishment can supply relevant identification reports of its clients and the correspondent accounts.
The company shall enforce effective controls and procedures when approving a correspondent relationship or other financial solutions agencies.

High-Risk Nations and Territories
The company must have proper and effective managing systems in accordance with the requirements of the Handbook. The management systems shall cover shell bank operations, high-risk assessment of different countries and geographical areas.
The firm will employ ECDD control measures to business relationship or trade where the client or beneficial investor has links with territories that:
•		Offer support or funding for terrorist actions or does not apply the FATF endorsements.
The firm shall refer to the term 'relevant connection' with a customer who:
•	Is a national government, public authority or Nation
 
•	Is a politically exposed person within the same territory or resides in the geographical area.
•	Has business investments and can be identified in the territory.

•	Generates funds and income from:

o		Resources owned with the client or investor from the territory.
o	Income originating from the territory.


•	Has relevant business links with the nation or territory as stipulated in the Channel Islands Handbook.
The company should have policies, processes and controls to categorise countries that fall within the demands and requirement of the Channel Islands Handbook.
In determining whether a nation provides support and funding for money laundering activities, the firm shall seek information from credible and valid databases and enforcement reports.
Besides falling within the demands in Schedule 3, the firm shall apply the NRA in its risk assessment analysis to prioritise the threat level of each business relationship.
As a part of its strategies, procedures and controls, the company needs to:
•	Be more conscious of concerns about flaws in the AML and CFT systems of different nations or territories.
•		Consider any company from threat evaluations and reports issued from by the Commission.
In assessing the strategies, control measures and policies of each country, the company shall consider:
1.	Reports and press statements issued by the regulator and enforcement watchdogs. These agencies include the UN, IMF,
 
World Bank and FATF.

2.	Findings of accounts issued by respectable sources such as crime watch agencies and US state department.
3.		Circumstances where the state or territory has not been subjected to anti-money laundering controls.
4.	Its experience in operations and threat assessment evaluation. The firm's experience could indicate flaws in the ML or FT execution in the country or broader concerns (by way of instance, the incidence of medication or person trafficking or governmental corruption).
Shares and Warrants
The company shall employ ECDD controls to any investment relationship or trade where the client or some other authorised person from the possession and management structure of the client owns some bearer shares.
A bearer share is equity possessed by any person that has the physical document or certificate. The bearer instrument cannot be documented as a register element.
Where the company's risk appetite permits the client or investor to own and manage the bearer shares, the company should have proper and effective strategies, processes and controls to mitigate the threat posed by their usage.
Where the company manages and controls a market transaction or business relationship, the board shall apply some ECDD measures to ensure compliance with the regulations and obligations of Schedule
3. The firm shall:

•		Ascertain and investigate the motives why the client, investor or other authorised people that control or has possession and management structure of the client has bearer stocks or warrants.
 
•		Have custody of their bearer stocks or warrants and ensure compliance in Location and immobilisation. The firm shall confirm the quantity of transaction and place of their bearer shares or warrants. Custodians of these bearer stocks or warrants shall notify the firm of any alterations to documents in their possession.
The company must enforce the above-mentioned guidelines, controls and procedures in any business relationship or trade no matter whether the recognised bearer share or warrant signifies a sum under the appropriate threshold for possession or management of the authorised individual.

Enhanced Measures
The company shall comply with the requirements of the Channel Islands Handbook on every business relationship, whether high-risk or low-risk operations. Therefore, the firm shall enforce enhanced measures on clients and business payments. The list includes:
•	Non-resident clients in the Bailiwick

•	The supply of personal banking services;

•		A client, which is an authorised person, utilised for private asset holding functions
•	A client that is:

0	An authorised person using nominee investors.
° Controlled and managed by an authorised customer with nominee investors.


This Handbook describes 'enhance measures' as the act and process of applying and enforcing effective and appropriate actions and decisions to detect, prevent and mitigate money laundering activities during business relationship and trade.
 
The firm shall note as a precautionary measure, since its business associations or trades may include more than one investment, the company must adopt enhanced measures based on the risk factor of each individual business. Such action prevents and mitigates varying degree of risk factors that accompanies each investment, exchange or trade transactions.
For example, a trustee builds a trust relationship for a client to whom it implements enhanced steps as established in Section 8.9. The agent then functions as the client in a business transaction with different investors in which, acting as a trustee, they create accounts a personal bank. The lender will employ enhanced steps to mitigate the threats related to its client being a private asset holding vehicle and provide personal banking services as detailed in Sections 8.10 and 8.11 of the	Channel Islands Handbook,

Non-Resident Client
Non- resident clients who attempt to develop a business relationship or run trade operations with a company in the country will normally have valid reasons for such business. However, such clients may carry higher threat or likelihood of ML or FT transactions. For example, moving illicit funds from their country, a territory of residence or concealing the origin of capital from an official of their current location.
Based on these assumptions, the firm shall apply the following measures to non-resident clients or investors with business relationships in the country of residence.
•	The firm must ascertain or investigate the client's reasons to establish a business relationship or conduct trade operations in the country of residence.
•	The firm shall employ external information sources to gather data on the client and the country threat evaluation to
 
construct a client's business and risk profile comparable to a resident client.
•	The firm shall apply appropriate and effective strategies and control to investigate and ascertain the client's source of funds and consider the mode of operations complies with the regulations of the Channel Islands Handbook and strategies on Money Laundering.
In accordance with the regulations of the Channel Islands Handbook, the firm shall investigate and document detailed explanations of its investigation and analysis on the reasons for the client's business relationships or transactions. The documents must be clear and easy to understand. The reasons given needs to be detailed and purposeful. The firm shall avoid subtle reasons such as tax preparation, asset protection or comparable investments.
Where the company determines that the reason for the business relationship or trade is tax preparation or tax reduction, the company shall comprehend the inherent tax justification for the investment or mutual trade. Where concerns have been raised relating to the rationale, the company shall request for a duplicate of the tax ruling or agreement form to ascertain the client's arrangements.
Where the firm shall ascertain the source of its investment capital and funds, the company should consider transactions that generated such comprehend the provenance of their capital and any possible consequences to these funds being transferred funds and the threat implications of transferring or moving the proceeds into the Bailiwick. For example, the firm shall determine if the client tries to evade or circumvent funds controls by simply transferring the illicit funds.

Personal Banking Services
 
Personal banking is defined as the supply of personalised banking or investment solutions to clients in a managed relationship. It might involve complicated, customised structures and higher value trades across multiple nations and territories. Such clients may pose varying levels of business threats on activities that facilitate ML and FT.
For the purposes of the section, personalised services shall be regarded as a private banking facility when it satisfies the following standards:
1.		When it is provided or suggested to private customer or clients (either directly or via an authorised individual or authorised arrangement) identified from the company as being qualified for the support based on the net value.
2.	Where it entails high volume investment.

3.	When it is a non-standardised arrangement.

4.	Where it is designed to meet the client's needs.

The firm must understand that personal banking services are not solely for banks a lender (with the exclusion of collecting deposits) but can be extended by a company authorised under the POI Law. A company authorised under the Trustee Law who facilitates private banking solutions as its responsibilities cannot be described as private banking merchant.
Based on the submissions above, the firms shall apply one or more of the following enhanced measures under a personal baking service.
1.		Assessing every transaction, agreement data and information acquired as part of the company's CDD policies to ensure the client's investments data complies with its regulations and remains relevant.
2.	Where trade tracking thresholds are employed, the firm shall ensure that effective measures were used and contemplate
 
whether should be decreased to provide increased oversight of trades linked to the company relationship
3.		Applying appropriate and effective measures to investigate and ascertain the client's source of wealth during business transactions to avoid threats of supporting money-laundering activities.
Where the company provides private banking solutions and other retail transactions providers, it must classify if the customer uses private banking solutions in accordance with ML laws or if the goods and services are categorised as transactions for retail banking solutions. If such transactions are retail investments, the firm does not require any enhanced control measures.

The Client is a Private Asset Holding Vehicle
The expression 'private asset holding vehicles' describes all legal persons or private agreements created by natural persons to the particular intention of holding resources for the investment. Whilst there are a few motives for establishing a private asset-holding vehicle, using such solutions as either an authorised individual or private arrangement may conceal the origin of wealth or the identity of the beneficial investor of the transaction. Private asset holding vehicles poses a greater threat, which makes it more challenging for the company to set up the true beneficial ownership of a client.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned assumption, the threat associated with personal asset holding transactions could differ based on the likelihood that a controlled corporate and trust service supplier provides corporate solutions to the private asset holding vehicle. This will consequently determine the degree of the
improved measures to be implemented from the company to the client.
In accordance with regulations of the ML Act, this section highlights enhance measures the firm can apply to customers who require
 
personal asset holding services.

•		Ascertaining the intent and reason for a private asset holding service as opposed to a valuable beneficiary investor holding assets. The firm shall ensure that the client's motive for such migration is authentic and legitimate.
•		Applying effective measures and control systems to detect and determine the client's source of wealth and funds used for business transactions.
The firm shall apply Paragraph 5(2) where the client is a third party, and the personal asset holding agent acts as a trustee for the business investor.
Where the firm investigates the intent and rationale for using the asset-holding vehicle, the board must document its conclusion and detailed analysis for future references. The reasons given must be detailed and purposeful other than tax preparation, asset protection or similar business deals.
Where the company determines that the reason for using the private asset-holding service is for tax preparation or tax reduction, the company should ascertain the inherent tax justification. Where concerns have been raised on the client's motives and rationale, the company shall request explanatory documents and duplicates of the customer's tax ruling or taxation information to evaluate the business arrangements and agreements.

A Client with Nominee Shareholders
There could be strong reasons for a client utilising nominee investors during business transactions. For example, the client may solicit their support to facilitate management solutions and reduce prices by permitting the nominee to provide crucial company activities.
 
Notwithstanding the above mentioned, as detailed the Handbook, the use of nominee investors create avenues and channels to conceal accurate possession and management by dividing beneficial and Legal ownership. Using nominee investors poses a higher risk, which makes it challenging for the company ascertain the true beneficial owner of the client's proceeds and operations.
For the purposes of detecting and preventing fraudulent transactions, involving the use of nominee investors and Legal shareholders, the firm shall apply the following enhance measures to mitigate and align its policies in accordance with the requirements of the Channels Islands Handbook.
1.		Ascertaining and satisfying itself concerning the reasons why the client or an authorised person who acts on behalf of the customer is using nominee investors.
2.		Utilising external information sources to gather information about the fitness and propriety of their nominee investor (like their controlled status and standing) and the country's risk priority.
3.	Where the nominees are classified under intermediary relationships, the company shall apply to enhance measures in accordance with the Commission's regulations.
Where the company establishes a business association or trade with a CIS that is authorised or filed by the Commission and has not been nominated as the party responsible for implementing CDD
steps to shareholders, the firm may not employ enhanced steps in such transactions and business agreements.

Simplified Customer Due Diligence (SCDD)
Introduction
This section enumerates procedures and steps for business relationships with low threat evaluation. It sets the capability to
 
employ SCDD steps in investment operations or trade transactions and defines simplified steps that could be implemented.
This chapter must be combined with Chapters 4 to 7 of the Handbook because it provides crucial COD obligations with specific requirements for all types of natural persons, legal investors and lawful agreements the company could manage as business links and operations.

SCDD procedures
The overall demand is that investment relationships and trades must pass different COD steps in accordance with Schedule 3. The measures include the capacity to identify and classify the client's identity and take sensible, appropriate measures to validate the identification of the beneficial investor.
These circumstances are examples where the business threat assessments have been categorised as low in ML and FT activities:
1.	A Bailiwick client where the company recognises the aim and motives for the business relationship or agreement.
2.		A business transaction or agreement where threats associated with the investments are low, and data regarding the client's identity is accessible, or where sufficient measures and controls are enforced.
3.	A business transaction or agreement where the client is an Appendix C enterprise.
There could be circumstances where threats ML and FT was evaluated as reduced from the Bailiwick based on its NRA. In such conditions, the company shall implement SCDD steps to identify and confirm the identity of clients and beneficial investors.
The SCDD measures implemented by the company ought to be commensurate with all the very low hazard factors and should connect simply to connection approval measures or to facets of
 
continuing monitoring (excluding sanctions screening). Examples of possible steps could include:
•		Decreasing the confirmation steps applied to the client or legal owner in accordance with the requirements of the Channel Islands Handbook.
•		Decreasing the level of monitoring and evaluation of transactions according to the client's financial threshold.
•	Conducting minimal analysis or executing specific steps to ascertain the objectives and motives for the agreement or business relationship. The firm shall always infer and classify the intent and character from each trade deal or transaction.
The company shall review its threat assessment on each business agreement and determine whether the identification information is valid and appropriate for the revised risk evaluation of each operation. The firm shall apply these submissions when it understands the conditions that trigger the business risk and SCDD steps.
Where the company approves a decision to apply SCDD steps, a detailed proof, which reflects the motive for such decision, shall be stored for reference purpose. The documentation should offer a justification for the firm's decision, such as why it was necessary to enforce SCDD steps in the business agreement and threats analysis of ML and FT.
In accordance with the regulations in Schedule 3, the powers to apply SCDD controls shall not be used in cases:
1.		Where the company doubt that parties to a business agreement or transaction are engaged in vices or activities that support ML or FT.
2.	Where the threat evaluation to a business relationship or trade is low.
 
Bailiwick Residents
Where the client, beneficial investor or other essential principal in the business agreement is a natural person, the firm shall enforce SCDD measures in accordance with the Channels Island Handbook. Where the company has decided it can apply SCDD procedures because the threat has been assessed as Low, it might elect to confirm the client's name, date of birth and residential address.
The firm must understand that not all residential customers in Bailiwick might have a Low-risk score. The company shall ensure that investment threat appraisal is undertaken.
Where the firm considers that threats to trade relationships or business transactions are higher than normal, it should implement CDD or ECDD measures in accordance with the regulations of Schedule 3.

Bailiwick Public Authorities
Where the client or beneficial investor to business operation is a prominent person in Bailiwick, the company may choose to use SCDD steps. However, in cases where SCDD procedures are implemented, it is optional to use all the verification steps for the public authority.
The company has to recognise and verify the identity of the Bailiwick's notable authority, including:
1.	The title of the authority

2.	The character and status of the prominent person.

3.	The Location and address of the individual.

4.	The titles of managers associated with authority.

The firm shall consider the following List as examples of portfolios described as public authorities:
•	A government unit or agency
 
•	A body created by legislation;

•	A parish authority

•	An organisation owned majorly by a public authority.

Where the legal customer is empowered to act on behalf of a public authority during employment, it is not mandatory to verify the identity of such individual. The firm shall verify the client's authority to act or make decisions for the public authority.

Investment Structures Registered by the Commission
Where the client or legal owner of the business agreement is a CIS authorised or filed with the Commission, the company shall categorise the CIS are the main agent based on the demands of its CDD policies.
Based on this assumption and for the purpose of verification, the firm shall collect evidence and proofs that the CIS is duly registered and authorised by the Commission.
Where a legal person who acts for a CIS is employed by the same institution, it is not compulsory to enforce measures or CDD policies. However, the firm shall verify the authority to act on behalf of the collective investment scheme.
For instance, where a lending agency is launching an account to get a CIS authorised or enrolled with the Commission, the lending institution may classify the CIS as the client to be assessed and identified.

Appendix C Firms
The term 'Appendix C' as described in the Channel Islands Handbook refers to nations or territories the Commission is empowered to regulate its financial service business (FSB) or prescribed business (PB) to detect, prevent and mitigate ML and FT
 
activities or operations in accordance with FATF recommendations. Appendix C shall be reviewed periodically to add and delete listed counties based on their threat assessment, agreement and policies as prescribed by the Commission.
The evidence that Appendix C contains countries that enforce FSB or PB regulations does not mean these nations have effective measures to tackle money-laundering activities. Therefore, compliance with the FATF recommendations differs from its adherence to effective policies and control systems.
The categorization or classification of countries as Appendix C does not mean that business activities in these territories are low risk nor does it imply that any business associate, client or owner with links to such nation shall be categorised as a low-risk investment.
Where the client has been classified as an Appendix C industry, and the motive for investment is known, subject to Commission with the exclusion of conditions in Paragraph 9, the confirmation of the identity of this Appendix C Company is not compulsory.
Where a client or associate is mandated to act on behalf of Appendix C, it is not compulsory for the company to investigate or confirm the identity of the individual. However, the company needs to verify the individual's ability to act on behalf of the Appendix C enterprise.
The company is not mandated to control FSBs or PBs from the authorities listed in Appendix C if they comply with the requirements in Appendix C. The company can impose higher standards compared to the minimum criteria identified in the Handbook where appropriate.
The requirements and provisions of this paragraph should not be implemented for an Appendix C firm because the customer or beneficial owner shall act only as a trustee or fiduciary of a trust.
 
Classification of Appendix C Nations and Zones
In categorizing countries and territories, the firm shall exercise its mandate in accordance with the requirements of schedule 3. The firm shall consider the following obligations.
•	The firm shall consider the ML and FT threat associated with nations, territories and geographical areas
•	The firm shall determine the level of collaboration it expects from relevant governments in these nations and regions.
The firm shall also consider the jurisdiction of all countries listed in Appendix C. The list of concerns includes:
a.	The authority's membership of the FATF.

b.	Reports and evaluations by the FATF or other regional figures for compliance with all the FATF recommendations;
c.	Good governance pointers

d.	The extent of illicit activities such as arms running, drug trafficking and corruption within the province of authority.
e.	The level of terrorist activities and terrorism financing operations within the regions of authority.
When reviewing tests performed from the FATF or alternative institutions, the firm shall monitor and observe:
•	The reports, assessment, and recommendations of FATF guidelines as stipulated by the Commission.
•	the evaluation, appraisal, and ratings of compliance of the listed countries on AML and CFT operations based on the FATF's 'Immediate Effects' in controlling business operations.
Receipt of Cash as Identity Confirmation
Where the client and beneficial owner investors are identified, and the board clarifies its operations and business investments as low
 
risk, the company will consider the receipt of payments, funds transfers or cash to confirm the client's identity.
To manage this provision and obligation, the firm shall ensure that:

1.	Cash transfers, funds and other payments are made from an Appendix C investment.
2.	Cash transfers and funds payment are made by clients or beneficial owners.
3.		Payments are paid into the client's account (third party transfers and payments are not permitted) or in the title of the authorised practitioner acting on behalf of the buyer.
4.	No modifications can be carried out for any service or product, which allow money to be received from or paid to a third party.
5.	Cash transfers or withdrawals are not allowed except by the client or beneficial owner, investor on a Face-to-face verification where the identification of the customer could be verified, and cash transactions can be confirmed.
Where the investor has been approved, and some demands were not followed, a thorough investigation and confirmation of the identity of the client and beneficial investor shall be conducted in accordance with the requirement of Schedule 3 and the Channel Islands Handbook.
Where the company suspects that customers or beneficial owners may have concealed certain parts of their transactions to evade compliance with COD measures, the bard shall cancel receipt verification for those individuals.
The company has to maintain documentary proof to show that its measures were detailed and effective, and business risk is low. Such evidence shall be used as a reference for future undertakings.

Intermediary Relationships
 
The term 'intermediary relationship' describes the situation where the company proposes a business agreement with an arbitrator who acts as a third party agent to several clients. In such a scenario, the firm deals directly with the third party agent who becomes a liaison or acts on behalf of the beneficial owner. Where the company has evaluated the ML and FT threats of such proposals with the third party as low risk, the board shall clarify the intermediary a customer and implement its CDD measures rather than identifying and confirming the identity of the beneficial owners.
The company should be mindful that money launderers are drawn to complicated services and products, which operate globally within a corporate and safe financial environment. Therefore, the company must be vigilant to the threat of an intermediary relationship agreement.
Subsequent sections in this Handbook highlight standards that must be fulfilled to get approval for a third party investment. In such conditions, the company will not have a direct association with the arbitrator's client and shall not employ CDD steps, unless the board considers it appropriate for the investment relationship.

Risk Assessment
The company shall evaluate the threat assessment of an investment relationship before approving the intermediary agreement or transaction. This type of assessment will permit the company to ascertain the threat of trust for the intermediary and consider whether it is acceptable to classify the individual as the company's client. Alternatively, the firm shall consider:
•		Deal with the arbitrator as an introducer in accordance with the recommendation of the Channel Islands Handbook.
•		Employ CDD steps to the client who acts as an associate or third party.
 
Criteria for Placing an Arbitrator Relationship
When creating or approving an intermediary business agreement, the company must enforce CDD steps to ensure that the arbitrator is:
•	An Appendix C investment.

•		Owned by a nominee subordinate vehicle of an Appendix C investment that enforces strategies, controls and measures in accordance with the requirements of listed nations and business.
When the firm's evaluation shows low risk for an intermediary business relationship, the board can implement CDD measures based on its prerogative. However, as a minimum rule, the company shall;
a.		Access, investigate, verify and confirm the identity of the intermediary.
b.	Collect written confirmation from intermediary as they:

1.	Affirm the intermediary has proper risk-grading processes to distinguish between the CDD needs for elevated risk low-risk relationships.
2.	Comprise proof that the intermediary enforces effective CDD steps for its clients. The measures include ECDD controls for PEPs and other high-risk investments.
3.	Includes adequate information to enable the company to understand the function and motive of the intermediary's business or agreement.
4.	Confirm that the intermediary shall manage all business accounts and has supreme control for all service or product.
 
Where an intermediary agreement has been created, the company shall prepare and keep documents and evidence of the following:
1.	The rationality of its decisions that the threat assessment is low;
2.	It has implemented CDD controls on the intermediary

3.	The intermediary relationship is associated with the supply of goods or services, and it complies with the regulations of the Channel Island Handbook.
In situations where the standards for an intermediary relationship are not effective or cannot be implemented, the link or agreement cannot be classified as an intermediary relationship.
Where the company has decided, according to its regulations, it cannot use the intermediary as the client, the board shall classify the associates of the intermediary the company's customers and shall apply CDD steps based in the regulations of Schedule 3 and the Channel Islands Handbook.
The firm shall consider whether it is safer to apply CDD measures to investors, shareholders, beneficial owners and Legal agreements rather than the intermediary who acts on their behalf.
The firm shall apply the following procedures according to the Commission's rule when dealing with the intermediary's associates and clients. The firm shall:
•	Open person accounts in the titles of all consumers on behalf of whom the arbitrator was authorised to control and employ CDD procedures.
•		Create accounts in the intermediary' name provided the company collects the List of clients being managed by the intermediary and apply CDD obligations to prevent ML and FT activities.
Classifying Products and Services
 
The firm shall consider and classify an intermediary as a customer when they operation or provide one of the following products or services:
1.	Investment of business capital to back your life company's policy obligations.
2.		Conducting different restricted investments with a POI licensee in accordance with regulated FSB and POI laws. In such situations, funds may not be transferred to a third party unless the individual is the source of wealth.
3.	Investments in a CIS or NGCIS venture. The beneficial owner shall control the investment account.
The Business of Life Company Capital

Where the company is accredited under the Banking Law and supplies services to life insurance firms via the Launching of an account to facilitate business transactions for the company's policy obligations, the board can classify the life insurance business as its client.
Where a firm licensed or authorised by the POI regulation and the insurance company is financing its policyholder capital in a CIS authorised by the Commission or an NGCIS, the firm can classify the Life insurance as its client.
If the investment or account includes a coverage identifier, the company shall procure a Legal document or undertaken from the insurance agency stating it is empowered and authorised to conduct the affairs and operations of the beneficial owner or policyholder in the Bailiwick.
Investment Activity

Where the company is accredited under the POI Law and conducts regulated activities with another controlled FSB, the company can treat that controlled FSB because of its client.
 
Where the company acts under these provisions, any funds obtained by the intermediary shall not be returned to another party, unless the associate or third party has the source of wealth and the company accepts that participation of the third party does not support ML or FT activities.
Transactions for Collective Investment Schemes (CIS)

Where the company was nominated in compliance with Paragraph
4.57 and investment conducted in a CIS or NGCIS with an intermediary, the nominated company shall categorise the intermediary as its client.
Investments conducted in a CIS through an intermediary as explained under Commission Rule 4.70 (a) where the identification of the inherent shareholders cannot be revealed to the CIS or the nominated company is a global practice and authorised by the IOSCO and ESAs.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned, the capability of investors to invest in a CIS in an anonymous transaction raises the threat of a CIS being used for ML or FT operations. Such assumptions are vital where there are few investors who are authorised to manage and control assets in a CIS via a third party or associate. By implication, it is possible for investors to control more than 25% of the stock's value via an intermediary and still conceal his or her identity of the business.
The nominated company must understand that some CIS may have fewer investors and such underlying factors do not affect its classification. CIS firms with fewer investors could be hedge funds, private equity capital agencies, or real estate. CISs with few investors of high net worth have a higher threat factor to carry out ML or FT operations than institutional funds.
Personal asset holding vehicle shall not be empowered, mandated or registered under the POI Law. The POI Law states that' a CIS is
 
any arrangement relating to the property of any description (including money)...in which the investors do not have day-to-day control over the management of the property to which the arrangement relates (whether or not they have any right to be consulted or give directions)'.
The nominated company must know that a licensed or registered CIS may possess the characteristics of a private asset-holding vehicle.
Where the nominated company applies an intermediary's provisions in a CIS, the nominated company must have evaluated the threat level of the CIS used by these investors of private asset holding automobile as low. The decisions of the assessment shall be recorded and analysed as a decision-making tool.
In conducting its evaluation according to the guidelines of the Commission, the nominated company shall observe the mode of shares distribution, the mandate attached to each unit of stock or shares, any unusual relations involving share or unit holders and board members or parties associated with the CIS.
The evaluation undertaken by the company shall form its threat assessment for the CIS or conducted and registered as a separate appraisal.
Where the CIS operates with institutional shareholders via specialised intermediaries, the threat of such scheme obtaining a private asset holding vehicle for few investors considered as beneficial owners in accordance with the Bailiwick's Beneficial Ownership program could be low risk.
A CIS may be created by an Appendix C investment as an in-house business for its clients and could act as the intermediary for such customers. In such cases, the nominated company shall investigate the CIS' supply and performance to ascertain the risk threshold of
 
each transaction. However, the firm may determine that the threat of the CIS is used as a private asset-holding vehicle is low.
Where the nominated company has assessed the risk of a CIS used as a private asset holding vehicle is minimal, the board shall not classify the intermediary as its client and has to verify the intermediary's links and employ CDD steps to investigate them. The intermediary's links could be associates, beneficial owners or principal officers.

Pooled Bank Accounts
Financial lending institutions and other related banking solutions receive pooled deposits from FSB and other associated organisations. The pooled accounts may include payments from more than one client and are held for an undisclosed period.
Where the company is authorised and empowered by the commission in accordance with banking laws and identifies accounts under its provisions, the firm shall treat such accounts as its customers. This provision is valid for:
•		Accounts owned by a fiduciary and empowered or authorised by the commission or equivalent authority in the Bailiwick. Such accounts must meet the requirements where:
o	The holding deposits in a short term basis.

o	The holding of deposits by management services or an intermediary.

•		A deposit account created by a company of lawyers or associates authorised by the commission in the Bailiwick.
•		A customer deposit account created by a company licensed in accordance with the POI law or other equivalent jurisdiction
•		A customer deposit account created by a company licensed in accordance with IMII Laws or other equivalent jurisdiction,
 
where the managers of the insurance institutions regulate funds.
The obligations in Paragraph 9.72 are permitted for subsidiaries that:

•	Has only clients with the Bailiwick.

•		Applies similar AML and CFT strategies, controls and procedures as the trustee in the Bailiwick.
For the obligation in Paragraph 9.72, deposits are kept for a short period when they are held anonymous for 40 days.
Where a company is authorised by the Commission and holds funds for a trustee on behalf of a global lender falling within the definition of an Appendix C investment, the company shall classify the overseas agency as its client in compliance with Section 9.6 of the Channels Island Handbook.

Creating a Pooled Banking Agreement
Where the company operates has accounts in line with the provisions of the Commission and the contract agreement was evaluated as being low risk, the company can exercise its judgment regarding the CDD steps to be placed on the account holder in the specific conditions. However, as a minimum standard, the company must:
•	Identify and confirm the identity and status of the account holder.
•	Get written authorisation from the account holder that:

o	Verify the account holder adopts effective threat assessment processes distinguish between the CDD measures suitable for high-risk contracts and low-risk agreements.
o	comprises sufficient assurance that the accounts holder applies suitable and effective CDD steps for its clients
 
(owners and other principals associates), such as ECDD control for PEPs and other high threat transactions or operations.
o	Includes adequate information to comprehend the function and planned nature of each contract or investment terms.
o	Affirms that the account holder has the sole power to manage and control the bearer account based on its product and service.

Where a business contracted has been approved and created for the account holder to manage a pooled account, the company must have documentary confirmation of the following:
1.	The effectiveness and transparency of the procedure to evaluate the threat assessment of the account holder and the rationality of its decisions that it is a minimal risk measurement.
2.		Assurance that the board implemented CDD steps concerning the account holder.
3.	That the contract relationship with accounts holders relates solely with the provisions for creating such transaction based on the obligations in the Channel Islands Handbook.
Where the company operates a pooled account for the account holder that:
•	Excludes the provisions in Paragraph 9.72

•	Was evaluated to contain some likelihood of fraud or raises concerns with the account holder's activities,
The company must declassify the account holder because all clients must enforce and comply with the CDD controls in accordance with the regulations in the Channel Islands Handbook.
 
The company should always consider if the threat would be managed better if its team applies CDD controls on the client, valuable owner or investor rather than classify the associate, trustee or account holder as a customer.

Natural Persons
Introduction
The objective of this Chapter is to assign obligations on how to collect data or personal information from a natural person who functions as a trustee in at least one of these capacities within a business contract.
a.	A client

b.	A beneficial investor

c.	A natural person who acts on behalf of a client

d.		A natural person that authorises the client to act on his or her behalf.
Accepting that a natural person who acts in one or more of the abovementioned capacities falls within the provisions of the Channel Islands Handbook shall satisfy the following:
•	The individual operates in accordance with the details provided in the identification form.
•	That the client or beneficial investor represents who they claim to be by checking his or her identification information and confirmatory proof of identity.
This section highlights the requirements for a natural person and the characteristics on which the natural person can be classified using an appropriate identification technique in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3.
The obligations of this section apply:
 
•	When setting a business contract or trade agreement

•	When executing a business transaction.

•	Where parties within the business contract or trade agreement change or cease to operate with the firm.
Identifying Natural Persons
Where the company mandated to categorise a natural person in accordance with Paragraph 7.1, the	board shall retrieve pertinent information regarding the identity of the natural person that contains:
a.	Name

b.	Any prior names (like a maiden name)

c.	Main residential address

d.		Nationality (such as cases where the natural person hold more than one citizenship)
e.	Any job currently or previously held and names of the organisation, institution, or job title where appropriate.
In accordance with the provisions of the Channel Island Handbook and in compliance with COD controls, the company shall decide whether the client or beneficial investor is a PEP and if the board confirms such assumption, it must determine if the client is a national or international politically exposed person (PEP).

Confirming the Identity of Natural Persons
In accordance with the requirements of the Channel Island Handbook, the company shall confirm the client's identity with identification appraisal data, the degree of which depends on the nature of investment and trade agreements. As a minimum standard requirement, the firm shall confirm the client:
•	Legal name
 
•	Registered date of birth

•	Area, Location and specific residential address.

The firm must confirm the following for natural persons associated with the trade agreement or investment contract provided there are classified as Low risk:
•	The associate's place of birth

•	The associate's nationality.

To verify the aforementioned data and information, the firm shall use the following identification guidelines as appropriate:
1.	Passport bearing a photo of the natural person. The resolution must be high to avoid facial controversies.
2.	National or government authorised identity card bearing a photo of the natural person.
3.	Military identification card bearing a photo of the natural person
4.	Driving permit or License is bearing a picture of the natural person
5.	Electronic information databases that are independently stored for reference purposes.
The examples mentioned above are not exclusive. There are some forms of identification information that could be applied to produce a similar evaluation to identify a natural person. The firm is at liberty to apply such procedures provided they comply with the provisions of the Channel Islands Handbook.
Irrespective of its kind, the company has to be satisfied with the validity and veracity of the identification data used to check the documentation of a natural person, and its appropriateness shall depend on the assessed probability of the investment contract or trade agreement. The firm shall be vigilant because certain records
 
might be prone to fraud than others or possess minimal measures of controls to detect the likelihood of money laundering activities. For example, some jurisdictions might issue driving licenses without due diligence being conducted on the account holder.
When changes alter the client's status and profile (for instance, a change of title), the company must employ a risk-based method of upgrading that individual's CDD records and determine whether further identification process shall be enforced to verify and confirm the change.
Besides the aforementioned verification measures, the company shall employ ECDD steps to the business relationship or mutual trade. The ECDD control mechanisms must include inter alia, comprising sets of measures as deemed effective and appropriate to verify and confirm the business contract or trade agreement in accordance with the provisions of the Commission.
Examples of supplementary aspects of the client's identity, which the company could confirm in cases where the client is classified as a natural person. The firm shall verify the client's job or previously held assignments in accordance with the provisions of ECDD obligations.

Verify the Client's Residential Address
Listed below are acceptable procedures to verify the home address of a natural person:
a.		A utility bill in the client's name or authorised credit card or banking account statement of transactions.
b.	Proof of correspondence from a government institution in the Bailiwick of Jersey.
c.	Private, corporate, commercial or digital data resources

d.		A letter from Appendix C investment where the client has an approved business agreement, and the customer's residential
 
address has been verified and confirmed.

e.	A property or tenancy contract

f.	A private visit to the client's residential address.

g.	An electoral identification card is showing the clients address.

Where a normal person's main residential address changes throughout the course of business, the company must confirm the new claim and document its findings in accordance with the provisions of the Channel Islands Handbook.

International Natural Persons
There may be times when a normal person who is non-resident in the Bailiwick cannot verify his or her residential address with the methods set out in Paragraph 5.15 above. Examples of these individuals include inhabitants of states without postal deliveries or even street addresses that use office boxes or even companies' addresses for mail delivery.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned, it is critical for security reasons that the firm must determine, verify and trace the client's residential address or other than documenting the customer's post office boxes and other particulars.
Where the company has decided that a person has a Legitimate reason for failing to comply with the identification process and may be removed from the business contract or trade agreement, the firm can validate the client's home address using non-specific methods, provided the board is satisfied with the effectiveness of the verification procedure. The firm shall also confirm that the new methods of verification will not create new threat activities during business operations.
A good illustration of such an alternative strategy can be a Letter by a manager or officer of a reliable overseas employer confirming the
 
residential address of the customer or providing detailed evidence of its location.

Internet Bank Statements or Utility Bills
Where the home address of a natural person could be confirmed via a bank/credit or bill payments, the default procedure is to request for a post-delivery form from the customer. However, the reception of these items through the conventional postal system should be replaced with internet billing, shipping manifest or bank statements sent via emails.
Examples of digital online statements include:

•	Internet banking statements from a renowned leaning institution, government agency, credit card merchants are bearing the full names of the account holder or natural person.
•		An online utility bill or tax deductions are bearing the full names of the account holder or natural person.
Where the company agrees to use an electronic invoice as confirmation evidence for a natural person's residential location, the board must be satisfied with the legitimacy and authenticity of the electronic statement introduced.
The company shall understand that some internet bank statements or tax utility bills can be altered to suit their fraudulent motives. If the board raises the threat threshold for such digital resources, the company is empowered to enforce any practical and proportionate measures ascertain whether the threat is confirmed. If the board confirms the likelihood of such a threat, it must verify whether the document can be accepted or rejected.
A good example of a measure the company could apply on the veracity of a record would be to confirm the information of the document from an independent source.
 
Electronic Verification
Electronic verification is described as the use of digitised systems or programs to confirm the identity of a normal person by fitting specified private information against digitally Captured bodily documentation or separate digital data resources.
An electronic affirmation can be utilised to confirm any combination of these required data points. Where an electronic confirmation system cannot confirm all the required data points, the company shall employ additional procedures to ensure such natural persons are verified in accordance with the provisions of the Commission and the Channel Islands Handbook.
Electronic verification systems vary by range and mechanism. For example, these verification tools could be digital capture, identification information of facial recognition or self-capture of uncertified documentation with a natural person utilising an interactive program from a computer or phone. A picture (or even a series of photos or a movie) of natural persons can be assessed and retrieved via Internet applications. Such documents can be verified independently to mitigate fraudulent activities or compromised standards.
Although digital verification reduces cost and time in collecting identification and information data for natural persons, the company should not forget the likelihood of additional threats on its use. The firm must determine the process and degree of inspection and support to avoid and mitigate avenues or areas of abuse.
Knowledge and comprehension of the performance and capabilities of digital systems show proof of suitability. The firm must confirm that these systems have the capacity to corroborate identification information. The use of different confirmatory links to match information emphasises the confidence of credibility.

Independent Data Resources
 
Independent information sources offer Broad selection of confirmatory proof on natural persons, and the technique has become more accessible. For example, independent information has become easy via public information and the development of commercial databases used by research companies. In accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3, data sources include:
•	Electoral forms

•	Phone directories

•	Payment cards or debit card verification

•	Business solutions providers; and

•	Digital checks supplied by commercial bureaus.

Where the company schedules to verify the identity of natural persons, whether directly or via the third party, the board must ascertain the comprehension of the depth and quality of the verification technique to identify its customers.
Independent information sources may be utilised to confirm individual elements or a combination of data points. Where an independent data source does not meet the requirements of the Commission, the company shall apply one or more steps to ensure customers are verified in accordance with the demands of the Handbook.
When relying on individual data sources to confirm the client's identity, the company should ensure that its origin, quality and scope of the information is appropriate and adequate and such design allows the firm to list and document its findings.

Safeguarding against the Financial Exclusion of Bailiwick Residents
There may be times when a Bailiwick natural person may encounter problems in providing proof of his or her residential address using the specified identification technique. Such scenarios may include:
 
•	A short-term job permit for clients that do not have a permanent residential address.
•		A natural person living apartments provided by his or her employee. In such cases, the resident natural person may not directly pay for utility bills or tax deductions.
•		A Bailiwick student is residing in a university, school, college or shared lodging, who does not directly pay for services.
Where a natural person has a genuine reason for not providing the requested files and may be excluded from obtaining the company's services, the firm shall provide an alternative way of affirming the client's Bailiwick residential location. Listed below are examples of alternative ways of confirming the client's residential address:
1.		A letter by the head of their family where the customer resides affirming that the applicant resides in the Bailiwick address. The letter of introduction creates a link between the natural person and the family head and proof that the family head resides in the Bailiwick address.
2.		A letter from the proprietor of the residence affirming that the client leaves in the purported property.
3.		A letter by a manager or supervisor of the employer confirming the residential address of the customer and the duration of employment. In cases of a short-term permit, the client's residential address shall be verified, and measures to verify the authenticity of the document.
4.	In the case of a Bailiwick undergraduate, a letter from a Bailiwick parent or guardian shall be accepted, and a letter of admission must be obtained from the school. The pupil's residential address must be investigated and appropriate measures applied to verify the authenticity of such a declaration.
Certification
 
Introduction
Certification is a procedure where a natural person undergoes personal and profile data identification. The individual employs a third party to verify the authenticity of links between his or her profile and identify data. The certified evaluation information is offered to the company as confirmation of the client's identity.
A third party certification mitigates the threat of transacting business agreements with anonymous clients who are principal agents of the trade agreement. Additionally, it protects against the threat providing fraudulent identification data that does not correspond to the person whose identity must be confirmed.
Client certification has two functions:

•	The process provides confidence to the parties of the business contract showing the true profile of each identity.
•	It confirms that the client, as the owner of the documents needed or provided to complete the certification process.
Certification demands that third parties must be natural persons of high public status. However, with improvements in engineering, the third party could be an automated system, which acts a certifier based on series of control integration.
This section is divided into three segments and supplies different requirements for client certification, depending on the technique to be utilised:
•		Natural persons confirming physical proof identification information.
•	Natural persons attesting scanned documentation information.

•	Digital ways of verifying identification information.

Obligations
 
For the certification process to be efficiently managed, the certifier must be a reliable third party that has witnessed and seen the initial identification information and where the information includes physical identification, the certifier must have met with the client.
These procedures must be followed to ensure compliance with the standards of certification.
To ensure compliance with the obligations of the Commission, the company should have the following agreements:
1.	A coverage or processes that reflect the business's risk appetite towards relying on the identification information;
2.		An effective policy for third party associates that are considered appropriate by the Commission.
3.		Processes allowing the company to verify the arrangement of these third parties with accredited identification information upon which the board intends to use.
The company needs to exercise caution when taking accredited identification information, particularly where such data arises from a nation recognised to represent a higher risk or by non-compliant institutions, agencies or entities.

Prerequisites for Natural Person Certifiers
Although there is no format to be adopted by the certifier, the company must ensure the certifier dates and signs the certificate and offers sufficient information to validate the following:
1.	That the certifier has seen the true copy of the client's identification information confirming their identity or home address
2.	That the certifier has seen the client or natural person who requires approval and identity verification.
3.	Sufficient information about certifier to enable the company to undertake the necessary evaluation of the suitability of this
 
certifier when the need arises.

The certification details shall be given by the certifier as a photocopy on the identification data or attached as a cover letter or other detailed reports that accompany certification data.
In accordance with the Commission's regulations, the phrase 'adequate information' means:
1.	The identity and names of the certifier

2.	The prominent position or public portfolio held by the certifier

3.		A detailed report of contacts associated with the certifier (email address, phone numbers or residential address).
The Commission rules that certification can be conducted in two ways, namely:
1.	A paper-format document where the client's certification is signed and stamped on a photocopy of the identification data or attached accordingly.
2.	An electronic or digital certification where the identification data is printed and stamped.
The procedure for electronic certification follows the same rules for the paper format verification. Where the certifier approves and accepts the identification information supplied by the client, the officer can then append his or her signatures using digital imprint. The certifier will apply an electronic signature similar to a digital replica of the identification information. The proof of certification shall be retrieved and sent electronically to the board.
Where the company utilises an online method permitting natural persons to re-evaluate their identification information electronically or receives identification information that was licensed by a natural person, the board must ensure that it satisfies itself concerning the authenticity of this certification process that granted such approval.
 
Where the company wishes to allow soft-copy accredited identification information, the rule is to use digital accredited (or equal) identification information utilising the procedure set out in Paragraphs 6.12. (b) and 6.14 above. However, there may be instances where the certifier may not have internet access and is unable to certify documents, and where the supply of hard-copy certification through postal methods is unfeasible.
Where the company receives identification information insured by Paragraph 6.12 electronically, the board has to be satisfied concerning the authenticity of this identification information supplied and the receipt of this identification information in soft­ copy type does not create a high-Level threat to the company.
In satisfying itself concerning the authenticity of this scanned soft­ copy identification information obtained, the company shall consider, among other elements, the sort of identification information used and the origin of the record (s) obtained.

Evaluating the Appropriateness of Natural Person Certifiers
Where photocopy identification information accredited by a natural person is approved, irrespective of the form of identification, the firm shall ensure that the certifier is qualified and the appropriate person to validate the identification information according to the assessed threat threshold. The firm shall measure the level of reliance it hold on the certified document based on the provisions in the Channel Islands Handbook.
In line with the provisions of the Commission, the firm shall establish strategic policy controls to determine if someone is qualified to categorise and certify documents based on the threat assessment of the business contract or trade agreement. The firm shall also consider if it could rely on the certified identification data. Under the policy, the firm shall consider whether the certifier:
 
a.	Is connected to or associated with the client whose identity has been certified.
b.		Retains a proper public position under confidence and whether individual profiling was conducted on the certifier
c.	Is a part of an expert body that undertakes independent supervision of compliance?
d.		Followed due diligence to meet the requirements for authorisation as part of its modalities to ensure compliance with the certification process.
e.	Works in one or more institutions forming a part of a group where the company adheres to the provisions of AML and CFT policies, controls and procedures.
f.	Is subject to specialist principles or a part of the industry body enforcing ethics for the certifier's behaviour.
The company's plan for checking the appropriateness of a certifier must include measures where the board deems it suitable to confirm the credentials of their certifier.
As part of the provisions stipulated in the Channel Islands Handbook, the firm shall consider the following instruments when confirming the qualifications of a certifier. The firm shall consider:
•	The standing and public records of the certifier

•	The firm's experience of accepting licensed records from clients with similar occupation or country.
•	The adequacy of control systems to mitigate ML and FT activities in the locations where the certifier operates.
•	The magnitude by which the firm's control systems applies to the certifier.
Certification Requirements for Digital System Certifiers
 
Along with the paper-based procedure of identity verification, firms also adopt digital designs of collecting identification information.
The details of such a procedure can be retrieved from Section 5.6 of the Channel Islands Handbook.
As technology has evolved and applications improved, higher controls have been integrated into the validation procedure that has successfully enhanced the demand for certification. These digital controls offer powerful confirmation of a client's identity along with the corroboration between the natural person and the identification information adopted for such certification. The examples below highlight the components of digital requirements:
1.		A regulation for photos to be obtained during the system's use. The application is programmed to take photos when the client is positioned before the camera.
2.	The addition of anti-impersonation steps (a necessity for the client to repeat phrases, words or passcodes ordered by the company during a video chat).
3.	The corroboration of these pictures to confirm the client's physical looks and online photographs.
4.		A procedure where the pictures are privately confirmed either with a trained person or computer program, to verify the credibility of the identification information utilised to confirm the client's identity.
5.	The corroboration of biometric data such as fingerprints and voice identification to verify, detect and match the client's records with physical proofs.
6.	The use of geotagging to verify the place where the user interacted with the machine.
Where the company adopts a method of electronic confirmation of the natural person, the board must evaluate the veracity of these controllers within the machine to ascertain whether it will rely on
 
the outcomes generated or if further steps are essential to match the present controls.
The measures undertaken by the company could comprise:

•		Requiring a representative of the company to be current together with thebe available with the client when the software is preloaded.
•	Issuing applicants a unique code of identification to ensure that all photographs are tagged during confirmation.
Certificate of Accreditation for Individuals and Legal Counsel
Where the company is provided with records to verify the identity of an authorised person that are duplicates of the originals, the board must ensure that all clients have been confirmed by the business secretary, manager, supervisor or a third-party certifier.
Where the company is provided with records to verify the identity and legal position of an agency or institution using duplicates of the originals, the company must ensure an agency official a proper third-party certifier accredits them.
Where the company is provided with records to verify the Legal position of trust using duplicates of the original forms, the company must be certain they are licensed by a representative of the Act or by a proper third-party certifier.
Certification must be supplied in an identical format as stipulated in Section 6.3 of the Channel Islands Handbook, either via a hard-copy record or an electronic imprint signature applied to a digital copy of the document.
While there are no special requirements concerning the wording used, the company has to satisfy itself the natural person certifying the record is qualified based on the provisions of the Commission for business contracts or trade agreements.
 
Chains of Duplicate Certified Documentation
The approval of initial identification information and data licensed in accordance with the provisions of the Commission protects the contract from fraudulent identification data that do not tally with the identity of the natural person or customer. The advantages of this strategy are restricted; however, it supports the certification process where files have now passed through different certifiers, and the connection between the client and the company is now distant.
Based on this concern, should not place emphasis on photocopies of licensed identification information, rather the board must consider acquiring the first certified copies of the client's identification data.
Where the company accepts copies of the client's identification information, the following criteria need must be adopted:
1.		A photocopy of the client's identification information supplied by an Appendix C firm.
2.	The Appendix C industry has verified the copy supplied is a true replica of this Identification data that it retains;
3.	The Appendix C firm must verify a qualified natural person must have certified true copies of the client's identification information submitted to the company and the identification information given to an Appendix C industry. The firm must ensure that the certifier was eligible to make such judgments to avoid fraudulent activities.
4.		Where the verification data replicated by the Appendix C industry relates to the confirmation of the natural person, the company shall ensure that the photocopy of the identification data provides proof that the client is who they purport to be.
In accordance with the provisions of the Commission, this section provides examples of justifiable cases:
 
•	The use of photocopies of the client's identification data stored by a trustee with the aim of creating accounts for his or her client.
•	The supply of copies of identification information stored by an Appendix C company for a legal professional engaged by Appendix C investment to provide guidance in relationship with a Client at the demand of the Appendix C enterprise.
The obligations in this section do not apply where the firm approves the control and management of business contracts by a third party or acquires customers from another producing agency. In these conditions, the company places reliance on the trustee or third­ party implement CDD steps to a client, beneficial investor or shareholder in compliance with its strategies, controls and procedures. Therefore, the company may make photocopies of accredited documentation as an assessment of the third party or via its acquisition of block consumers.

Record Keeping
Introduction
This unit summarises the demands of Schedule 3 and the Commission's requirements for record keeping and provides advice of countering threats of ML and FT operations.
Record keeping is a vital component required by the Commission. It helps financial evaluation and supports the exclusion of criminal capital proceeds from the fiscal system. However, cases that end up within the fiscal system are detected and confiscated by legal and enforcement agencies. Where legislation authorities or compliance officers resident in the Bailiwick or elsewhere cannot detect or trace criminal activities due to inefficient records, it becomes difficult to prosecute, prevent and reduce their activities. Similarly, if the capital used to fund terrorist activity cannot be tracked via the fiscal
 
system, then the destinations and sources of terrorist funding will not be recognizable.
Adequate record keeping can be crucial to facilitate effective oversight, permitting the Commission to oversee compliance with the company with its constitutional duties and supervisory requirements. Record keeping supplies proof of completed task and operations to comply with statutory duties and regulatory demands. Such obligation permits the firm to provide regular updates of its assessment documents, press statements and reports. The threat assessment reports must be transmitted to competent national authorities in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 and the Channel Islands Handbook.
To ensure strict adherence and compliance with the provisions of the Channel Island Handbook, firms shall have strategic and effective procedures and controls mechanisms to maintain regular updates of confidential files, retained and stored in accessible databases.

Business Links and Client Records
In accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 and the Commission's requirements, the firm shall preserve and maintain:
•		All trade files (as detailed at Section 16.3), business risk evaluations, and CDD controls or data.
•	Photocopies of all listed documents for reference purpose.

To comply with the provisions of the Commission and Schedule 3 concerning threat assessment records, investment risk evaluations and CDD controls, the company must maintain the following documents:
•		Copies of this identification information obtained to verify the identities of customers and investors.
 
•	Copies of the risk assessments report completed according to Paragraph 3(4).
•		Copies of any client documents account and business correspondence and data concerning the business contract. The firm shall produce all relevant documents concerning the risk analysis and its outcome.
•	Detailed information about the firm's threat assessment analysis.
The minimum retention time for the CDD data is:

•	Five years beginning from:

o	The date where the client signed an investment agreement with the organisation
o	The date where the client completed an investment operation and trade with the company.

Transaction Records
Under the provisions of the Commission, the firm shall keep records of each trade with customers such as amounts and methods of transfers involved in the trade and this type of document shall be known as a 'trade record.'
In accordance with the provisions to safeguard transaction records, trades completed on behalf of a client in the class of business should be listed by the company. In each case, sufficient data must be recorded to facilitate effective monitoring and prosecution when the need arises.
As part of its modalities to keep records of each transaction, the firm shall include:
a.	The title and address of both the client and the beneficial investor.
b.	The value, amount and currency of each trade
 
c.	The profile title and reference number where it could be identified
d.	Particulars of the counterparty, such as account details

e.	The nature of the trade or business transaction.

f.	The effective date and time of each transaction.

Records about unusual, intricate trades and higher-risk transactions must comprise the Company's own testimonials of these trades.
In accordance with the provisions of the Commission, the retention of traction records shall be:
•		A period of five years beginning from the date of each transaction and the time of completion.
•		Where the time for each transaction exceeds five years, the Commission shall give approval for a time extension.
In accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3, where the company is mandated to offer trade documents or COD measures to customers prior to the conclusion of their minimum retention period, the company will:
•	Maintain and keep a photocopy of the trade record or COD data until the interval has elapsed.
•	Keep a register of trade files and COD data used during the business contract.
Wire Transfers
The provisions of Schedule 3 stipulates that a payment service provider (PSP) of the payee shall maintain records of transactions obtained from the payer for five years beginning from the date of the payment transaction and transfer of funds.

External and Internal Disclosures
 
In accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 14 of Schedule 3, the company must maintain records of all internal disclosures transmitted to MLRO or the nominated officer. The firm shall also maintain all external disclosures made in accordance with the provisions of the Terrorism Law.
In sustaining the provisions of Schedule 3 and the guidelines on disclosures, the firm must maintain:
1.	Internal disclosure along with any supporting files

2.	Documents of activities for internal and external reporting needs
3.	Proof of transactions and inquires obtained for such disclosure

4.		Records where the MLRO enforced recommendations based on the treat assessment of ML and FT activities, but has not
made external disclosures to the FIS.

5.		Records where external disclosures were announced and evidence of such pronouncements and copies of relevant information passed into the FIS.
Along with the aforementioned, the company shall maintain a register comprising of internal and external made to the FIS. As a minimum, the firm shall include:
1.	The date and time of such internal disclosure were obtained from the MLRO.
2.	The title and name of the compliance officer submitting the internal disclosures.
3.	The date the disclosure was made to the FIS.

4.	The title of the person who filed the disclosure into the FIS (where appropriate)
5.	The value of this trade or action subject to this disclosure (where accessible).
 
6.	A benchmark from which supporting evidence of such disclosure is recognizable.
7.		Date and time of additional information and updates filed and transmitted to the FIS.
In accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 and the Channel Islands Handbook on the stipulated retention time is five years beginning from:
•	The date the business transaction was terminated (where it relates to internal or external disclosures).
•	The date and time such transaction or business operation was completed (where it relates to internal or external disclosures).
•	The activity or event that created such business disclosures, whether internal or external announcement.
Coaching Records
In accordance with the provisions of the Channel Islands Handbook and Schedule 3, the firm must maintain records of training conducted by the board under Paragraph 13 of Schedule 3 for five years beginning from the date such training was completed.
In accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 14 of Schedule 3 that mandates the board to maintain records of AML and CFT training, the company has to list the following at a minimum:
1.	The dates coaching was supplied.

2.	The essence of this practice.

3.	The titles of workers who received instructions and training.

Business Risk Assessments
In accordance with Paragraph 14 of Schedule 3, the company shall maintain photocopies of its risk assessments completed under Paragraph 3 of Schedule 3 five years after the date in which they ceased to become operative.
 
Strategies, Approaches, Controls and Compliance Tracking
In accordance with the provisions of compliance tracking, the firm shall maintain documents, reference guide and other relevant materials until:
•	The expiry period of five years beginning from the date such operation was finalised.
•	Such materials or documents are superseded new updates in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3.
To satisfy the needs Paragraph 14 and the requirements of Schedule 3, the company shall maintain:
•	Reports created by the MLRO and MLCO for the board and other officials.
•	Records or documents of the board's consideration of these reports and actions taken.
•		Records created by the company or from other parties about the firm's compliance with Schedule 3 and the provisions of the Channel Islands Handbook.
Closure or Transfer of Company
Where the company terminates agreements or associations with clients, the board must comply with the record-keeping requirements of Schedule 3 and the Channel Island Handbook.

Ready Retrieval
In accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3, reports, threat assessment sheets and COD measures shall be stored in a format that is easily retrievable.
The company must review the ease of recovery and condition of online and paper retrievable records.
 
In accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3, reports, threat assessment sheets and COD measures stored according to Schedule 3, must be transmitted promptly to:
•	An auditor or accountant

•	To an enforcement officer, the FIS, the Commission or individual, where these files or COD data are needed in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 and other appropriate enactments.
The company must consider the consequences for fulfilling the needs of Schedule 3, where third parties, like outsourcing structures or an introducer, hold documentation and threat assessment data.
The company should not enter into outsourcing agreements or rely on third parties to keep threat assessment documents or reports where these records are very likely to be limited.
Where the FIS or other competent authority requires sight of documents, in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 or other enactments, the company must run a detailed analysis of such documents and provide explanations to the FIS or alternative, competent jurisdiction.

Storage Forms
The record-keeping requirements will be similar regardless of the layout in which the documents are kept or whether the transaction was undertaken by electronic or paper means.
Records can be kept:

1.	By means of original records;

2.		By means of photocopies of documents (accredited where appropriate)
3.	On microchip

4.	As a scanned document
 
5.	In a system or digital device (cloud storage).

Using technologies to collect or store info and files does not change the provisions and obligations as stipulated in the Channel Island Handbook.
Where the company adopts a digital way of collecting identification information, such as applications and PDAs as established in Section 5.6 of the Channel Islands Handbook, the board should include within its risk evaluation and assessment of the criteria for its retention of files. This test permits the firm complies with the provisions of Schedule 3 and the Channel Islands Handbook.

Transitional Provisions
Introduction
This section details the steps to be executed by the company to change compliance or requirements under the Criminal Justice systems as amended by the Commission and the Channel Island Handbook. The section highlights deadlines where these revised controls must be executed.
In accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Justice Act, the requirements of Schedule will be effective from March 2019.
To facilitate the change to a new regime, a tiered method to the inspection of existing trade relationships was supplied, permitting the company to upgrade its investment risk evaluations and COD data as part of its monitoring and CDD initiatives.
This section covers specific areas of Program 3 and the Commission rules where material modifications are made to the provisions of the previous establishment. The company should verify existing information under Schedule 3 and this manuscript to evaluate the scope of changes necessary for implementation.

Trade Risk Assessments
 
As identified in the Channel Islands Handbook, a risk-based strategy begins with the identification and evaluation of threats that must be assessed and managed. Consideration of this information obtained as a member of the company's ML and FT risk evaluations will allow the company to evaluate the right controls necessary to mitigate and manage the risk factors.
In accordance with the provisions and obligations of the Channel Island Handbook, the firm shall conduct appropriate and adequate ML threat assessment and a suitable FT business hazard evaluation, which can be unique to the company. These reforms shall be implemented after March 2019.
To satisfy the provisions of Paragraph 3 and the Channel Islands Handbook, the company must examine its current threat assessment to ensure it includes appropriate, sufficient and different assessments of ML and FT vulnerability to the company.
In accordance with Paragraph 17.6:

•	The company shall examine its business enterprise risk assessment and revise its ML and FT assessments as accepted by the board by May 2020.
•	The decisions of this Bailiwick's NRA must be considered in subsequent reviews in accordance with the mandate of the Commission.
Policies, Strategies and Controls
As part of its procedure for an effective risk-based strategy, the guidelines, controls and actions invented and employed by the board shall be determined by the threat assessment of ML and FT activities. The strategies, controls and procedures of the firm must be assessed differently with its investment risk evaluations to
ensure that changes in the professed vulnerabilities are handled and managed by its controls.
 
In accordance with the provisions of the Channel Islands Handbook, the company shall evaluate its controls, strategies and policies after March 2019 to ensure that its parameters and measurements remain potent and appropriate.
For the purpose of paragraph 17.10 and in accordance with the provisions of the Commission:
•	The company must have examined and revised its policies, processes and controls before May 2020.
•	The decisions of this Bailiwick's NRA must be considered as part of the company's review of strategies, processes and controls.
In assessing its strategies, processes and controls, the company should ensure the board mitigates threats arising from the revised company risk assessments. The following examples can be applied but not limited to:
1.	Client take-on processes: To make sure that any modifications necessary to the investment risk assessment are considered with alterations to CDD information required for its clients.
2.		Employee teaching contracts: To ensure that revised threats identified as part of the evaluation process are communicated to workers, with the company's risk appetite and tolerance.
3.	Screening/monitoring devices utilised to identify PEPs: To ensure that national and foreign PEPs are flagged when detected.
In accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 and the Channel Islands Handbook, the firm shall maintain its controls and procedures under the FSB or PB Regulations.

Money Laundering Reporting Officer
In accordance with Paragraph 12 of Schedule 3, the company shall appoint an individual of management Degree to act as the MLRO.
 
The board shall supply the name and email address of the individual within fourteen days beginning from the date appointment. The board must transmit such decisions to all employees and reveal the MLRO during its meetings.
Paragraph 12 of Schedule 3 provides that an individual who acts as the MLRO under Part Ill of the FSB Regulations is appropriate to act as the MLRO.
Where the company's MLRO appointed in accordance with the provisions of the FSB or PB Regulations declines the job under Schedule 3, the company must notify the Commission and the FIS.
Notifications to modifications or changes in the MLRO portfolios shall be transmitted via the Commission's online portal.

Money Laundering Compliance Officer
In accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 15 and requirements of the Channel Islands Handbook, the firm shall appoint a compliance officer of management degree as the MLCO and supply the name, title designation, email address and other relevant details to the Commission via its portal within fourteen days beginning from the date of appointment.
Additional information on the function of this MLCO, such as the demands of this portfolio may be located in Section 2.8.1 of the Channel Islands Handbook.
The board of this company must ensure that an acceptable MLCO is chosen by March 2019 and the Commission shall be informed of the placement and changes by April 2019.
Notification of an individual's appointment for the post of MLCO must be made through the Commission's Online PQ Portal.
It is important to note that under the provisions of Schedule 3 as stipulated in by the Commission in the Channels Islands Handbook,
 
an individual who retains the portfolio as an MLRO may likewise be appointed as the company's MLCO.

Business Relationships
In accordance with Paragraph 4, the company shall ensure that the CDD steps established in Paragraph 4 of Schedule 3 have been applied to all business relationships before the enactment of the new regime:
The firm shall keep accounts accordingly, to allow the board to meet the requirements of Schedule 3 and Commission Rules as stipulated in the Channel Islands Handbook.
The company must enforce relationship threat assessment and CDD controls of Schedule 3 with the provisions of the Handbook, including the use of improved steps as required to existing business transactions at the appropriate time based on the risk threshold.
The provisions permit the company to apply relevant factors instead of adhering to a 'tick box' implementation.
The review of business risk evaluations and CDD data in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 and the Channel Islands Handbook must be carried out at appropriate occasions while considering if any CDD steps have already been applied and the adequacy of the identification information obtained.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned, the board shall ensure that all investment relationships ranked high risk shall be reviewed by 31 December 2021.
In conjunction with Paragraph 8 of Schedule 3, as a part of reviews conducted by the company in compliance with the provisions of the Commission, the company must take measures deemed essential to address risk assessments with effective CDD measures.
Where, after a review, the company has concluded that the threat of a business contract has not been altered and believes the enforced
 
CDD data validates the identity of and mitigates the risks associated with the client in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 11.43 the company is not obliged to re-verify the client's identity.
When deciding whether it is crucial to collect additional CDD info, the company should inspect and research if existing documents include the mandatory items. The company might have had a business contract for years and therefore hold substantial information about the client. In these situations, research must be undertaken to explain if it is an issue of collating documents before approaching the client.
Where the company has concluded the CDD data held is not sufficient to allow compliance with schedule 3 and the provisions of the Commission, the company should consider the materiality of additional information and documentation required and if compliance can be accomplished through alternative ways. Such alternative means could be via using databases or confirmation tools to supply extra identification information or corroborate any identification information stored.
Where the company holds accredited identification information that was obtained before the new law regime, and the company is satisfied with the authenticity of this identification data the certificate supplied, the company is not required into re-certify (or search recently licensed ) identification information.

CIS: Nominated Company for Investor CDD
In accord with paragraph 4 and provisions of the Commission, CIS authorised or enrolled by the Commission should nominate a company accredited under the POI law to be accountable for the CDD steps of investors under the CIS.
According to Commission's rule, the nominated company should classify investors under the CIS as its clients and address them
 
according to with the needs of schedule 3 and the provisions of the Channel Islands Handbook.
Where a CIS has been empowered and mandated by the Commission, the nominated firm has to inform the Commission from the 2019 it has been chosen for its operations.
As a channel of informing the Commission of the company's nomination with a CIS, a form eligible 'notification of the business's nomination for investor CDD' shall be made accessible through the Commission's online submissions.

Legal Clients and Legal Engagements
Introduction
This section highlights the requirements as a minimum standard of compliance for a Legal investor or Legal arrangement which acts as a component in the firm's business.
1.	A client

2.	The beneficial investor of the client

3.	An authorised investor or Lawful contract purporting to act on behalf of the client.
4.	An authorised investor or Legal contract that empowers or authorises the client to act.
The identification and confirmation provisions for Legal investors and Legal engagements are not the same as those for natural men. While a Legal investor or endorsement includes a Legal standing that may be confirmed, business contracts or trade agreements between an authorised investor and Legal arrangement must contain natural persons such as beneficial investors. This chapter must, therefore, be read along with chapters 5 and 4 that enforce CDD controls to be implemented to natural persons acting for or on behalf of or associated with, a client that is an authorised person or Lawful endorsement.
 
A legal investor or client describes a person, other than a natural person that can be classified as someone for restricted legal functions. By implication, a legal investor can sue and be sued. Such individual can manage properties and sign contract agreements in its right. This may include businesses, corporate foundations, institutions or other comparable entities that are not legal agreements.
Legal arrangements do not have independent legal personality and so form business connections via their trustees in accordance with the provisions of the Commission the trustee of this trust enters a business contract or trade agreement on behalf of the trust and should be considered with the trust as its customers.
There is an array of trusts and other comparable structures, which range from large, national and globally active organisations with a higher level of public examination and transparency established for wealth management functions.
Under the provisions of the Commission, the firm is authorised to apply measures to mitigate the abuse of legal persons and legal contracts for ML and FT activities. When establishing a business threat assessment, the company must consider a wide range of ML and FT operations based on its dimensions, scale, action and construction. The firm must evaluate the impact or influence these legal persons or legal contract may create. Complex transactions or anonymous agreements may pose higher risks, which attracts detailed analysis to ascertain a suitable risk classification.
Based on the results of its threat assessment, the company shall consider how the client and other authorised persons or legal agreements that fall within the provisions of the Commission should be recognised and how the classification data should be improved where necessary.
Where the company functions as resident representative for a legal person in Bailiwick, its operations are subject to the BOL and BOR
 
requirements.


Transparency  of Beneficial Proprietorship
It is critical that the company has detailed image of its client, such as natural persons with possession or control within the client's affairs. The firm shall recognise various legal duties fall within the provisions of the Bailiwick and whether the authorised person or lawful investment has been abused for criminal purposes. As financial fraud legislation, such as tax laws have become more complex, investors have devised fraudulent ways and structures to conceal the true ownership of many business investments and operations.
When applying COD steps on customers who are legal investors or authorised agreements in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3, the firm is mandated to enforce effective measures to validate the identification of the beneficial investor that acts as an authorised person or legal arrangement.
The definition of the proprietor in the context of authorised investor should be distinguished by the theories of legal possession and management. Legal possession means the legal individual (s) who based on law own the authorised individual. However, legal control or management refers to the capacity to make decisions within the authorised individual. For example, managing or controlling a large volume of shares.
A vital element of this definition of proprietor is that it transcends lawful possession and management and focusses on supreme (real) possession and control. the definition describes the natural (not authorised) investor that really possess the assets or capital of the authorised individual, in addition to the ones who actually exert powerful control over it (whether they occupy formal positions within the legal person), rather than the legal or natural persons that are lawfully qualified to do so.
 
In the context of trust, beneficial investor includes natural persons receiving benefits from the trust and people linked with, or have control over, the trust's trade investments. The context includes the trustee, enforcer, guardian and selector.
In accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3, the firm will shall investigate the ownership and management structure of the client.
When applying measures to verify and investigate the true ownership and management structure of a client in accordance with the provisions of the Commission, it is not compulsory to investigate all legal owners or lawful arrangement associated with the business contract. However, the company must adopt measures to assemble sufficient information regarding the identification of third parties and to enable the board identify customers falling within the description of legal persons and to ascertain whether the third party investor issued bearer warrants.
Where the firm exercise it powers to verify and identify legal persons or legal investments, it must do so in accordance with the requirements of the Commission and the Channel Islands Handbook.
Where a business contract or trade agreement between an authorised person and legal agreement poses a higher threat and/or requires the use of enhanced controls, the company should consult with the provisions highlighted in chapter 8 of the Channel Island Handbook.

Measures to Control Shareholders
The use of shareholders provides avenues of concealing the ownership and management of an authorised person or lawful arrangement. To minimise the threat of supplying services or products to a client utilising such arrangements, it's crucial that lawful and beneficial ownership is listed thoroughly and appropriate
 
steps are required to establish the authentic identity of these individuals with ultimate possession and management of a client.
The company must have proper and effective methods to prevent the abuse of nominee investors or shareholders. The board shall ascertain whether a shareholder has nominee investors and the capacity to identify and apply enhanced measures to determine the identity of investors who control the legal individual or legal arrangement.
Where the company identifies the client is an authorised person with shareholders or managed by legal investors with customers, in accordance with the provisions of the Channel Islands Handbook, the board shall enforce enhanced control procedures as stipulated by the Commission.
While classifying the owner of an authorised person or lawful arrangement, a nominee shareholder would not be regarded to control the client. The company must, therefore, look via the nominee shareholder and determine from whom decisions are being accepted by means of a nominee director and on whose interests the shares are held.

Nominee Shareholders
A nominee shareholder of an authorised person who retains the interest or shares of an authorised person on behalf of other customers. The identification of the actual beneficial owner(s) is not revealed to the register. In this example, the nominee shareholder shall not be classified as the beneficial owner.
Nominee shareholders may be used to conceal the beneficial ownership of an authorised person. A natural person may proactively maintain a vast majority interest in an authorised individual through nominee investors as each may hold a minimum interest and therefore camouflage the identity of the natural person that truly holds effective management and control.
 
To mitigate threats posed by nominee investors, the requirement of acting as a shareholder must be subjected to the provisions of the Channel Islands Handbook and the requirements of the Commission. Similar strategies have been adopted in several regulation and laws to mitigate the threats of fraudulent beneficial owners.

Nominee Directors
A nominee director is a natural client that acts on behalf of another client.
A nominee director, therefore, cannot be regarded as the proprietor on the premise they are used by another client who will finally exercise effective control within that legal individual.
Measures have been taken to counter the threat of legal persons acting as nominee manager by requiring those who supply or behave as a manager must be accredited under the fiduciaries law and consequently subject to the needs of schedule 3 and the Commission rules within the Channel Islands Handbook. However, the company shall be alert concerning legal persons from different authorities for signs that a manager may be performing on the directions of another individual.
Factors that might imply a client is authorised to act on behalf of an undisclosed party may include:
•	Where the customer's qualifications are inconsistent with the authorised person's action and goal
•	Where the person holds other unrelated board appointments.

•	Where it shows the manager may be taking directions from a different person whose connection with the legal person is uncertain.
Legal Persons
 
Confirming the Identity of Legal Persons
Where an authorised person is an integral associate in a business contract, the company must identify and confirm the identity of the Legal person (or require effective strategies to perform the test in accordance with the provisions of the Commission. As a minimum, the firm shall obtain:
1.	The title of the authorised person, such as any names

2.	The lawful form and regulation to which the authorised individual is subject
3.	The date, country, or territory of all amalgamation, registration and formation (as important).
4.	The address of official buildings and key officials.

5.	The titles of those natural persons with a senior management position from the Legal individual.
The non-exhaustive list provides illustrations of files considered appropriate to confirm one or more components of the individuality of an authorised person:
1.	A photocopy of the certificate of merger.

2.	A photocopy of the MOU or articles of merger.

3.	A photocopy of its financial statement.

4.	A photocopy of its fiscal returns

5.	A photocopy of the register of supervisors.

6.	A photocopy of the register of investors.

7.		A business registry, containing affirmation that the authorised person has not been dissolved or dismissed.
8.	Separate data resources, including electronic databases.

9.	A photocopy of the board's resolution authorising the creation of accounts and documenting the accounts signatories
 
10.	A private trip to the main location of business associates and participants officers.
Where the files obtained are duplicates of the originals, the company should consult with the provisions of the Commission and the Channel Islands Handbook.
In trying to recognise and verify the titles of those natural persons with senior positions according to Commission's rule, the company should gather information on the identity of directors of the authorised person or equal positions who enforce binding obligations on an authorised investor, such as authorised signatories, and confirm the authenticity of such positions.
Where more than one supervisor acts for and on behalf of some associates, such clients must be verified and classified in accordance with the provisions of the Commission. When such exercise s conducted via a cooperate manager acting for an authorised person, the company should identify and confirm the titles of those directors and determine the profile of customers who are representing the corporate manager acting for the authorised individual. Where a client empowered to act on behalf of a natural person is conducting its activities in the course of employment, the is not compulsory to verify the identity of the individual, provided that confirmation was obtained from the legal person the client is authorised to manage.
33. In most cases, not all supervisors of an authorised person will be acting with a transparent. For such examples, the company shall recognise and confirm the person holds the purported position, but when this individual does not act for the authorised individual in an executive capacity from the relationship with the company, the board should not recognise the identity of the director.

Introduced Business
Introduction
 
An introduced business or trade is a formal agreement where an Appendix C firm acting on behalf of more than one customer establishes a company relationship or undertakes a trade using a specified company on behalf of the client. Introduced investments or trades could be on behalf of one client or a pool of clients.
An investment relationship created by an introducer on behalf of its clients is termed a pooled relationship.
This section does not accept outsourcing agreements. Under an introducer contract, investors or third party associates must adopt its own processes to execute the COD steps for its clients. The procedure contracts with the outsourced relationship in which the outsourced supplier is seen as a member of the assigning firm, using the assigning company's COD steps in agreement with its processes and subject to supervision and management for the implementation of these processes by the assigning firm.

Risk Exposure
Introduced investment or agreements have a higher risk threshold. Since the process relies on third-party agents or associates to apply COD steps to mitigate the threat of this company being included in ML or FT activities. While the company is authorised to show detailed information regarding its client, the board places dependence on a third party to confirm the identity of the client and valuable owner, and to keep evidence of this affirmation.
The company must recognise the higher threat created by the introduced agreement and ensure that its consideration is documented within its risk examinations.
Besides a justification of the threats recognised, the company's investment risk assessments must include an outline of strategies, processes and controls created to mitigate and handle such vulnerabilities.
 
The company needs to consider, for every company relationship or trade, whether it will be appropriate to rely on a certification of its threat assessment by an introducer in accordance with the provisions of the Commission.
The responsibility of complying with all the applicable provisions of paragraph 4 shall stay with the company.

Creating an Introducer Relationship
As represented below, the company may take a written verification of identity along with other records for the introducer provided that:
•	The company collects photocopies of identification information and other pertinent documentation on the identity of valuable owners to be made accessible by the introducer upon request.
•	That the introducer retains such identification info and files.

In accordance with the requirements of Schedule 3, the terms of an introducer as mentioned above include:
•	An Appendix C firm.

•		An international branch division of legal individuals or legal agreements as the company.
Testing
The company must have an organised plan of testing to make sure that, an introducer can match the requirement that certified photocopy it gathered would be supplied to the company. This may involve the company embracing procedures to ensure it has the capacity to acquire such identification information.
The testing program shall be risk-based and proportionate with the threat vulnerability, size and scope of the introduced client. The program must provide proper and adequate assurance it may continue to rely on the introducer to supply identification documents on request. In accordance with the provisions of the
 
Channel Islands Handbook, introducers with higher risk threshold must be prioritised to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Commission.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned, the company shall set a minimum period in which introducers would probably be subject to intermittent testing and document its findings within the testing process.
The scope of the testing performed must include confirmation that the data received from the introducer containing details regarding the identity of the inherent client is valid, authentic and reliable.
This permits the company to ascertain if it desires to rely on the arrangement or seek additional data on introducer regarding the client or related principals.
Where the company is not convinced the introducer has adequate policies and processes to maintain records or offer evidence of these documents, the board must employ CDD steps according to paragraph 4 for this client, including the valuable owner and shall consider the thought to terminating its connection with the introducer.

Termination
Where an introducer terminates its connection with an introduced client, the company should consider how it would continue to keep compliance with its CDD duties for that client and related principals.

Appendix A: Differences between both Handbooks
There are differences in the obligations of both handbooks. The Guernsey AML Handbook and the Jersey AML / CFT Handbook for regulated financial services business specified scenarios to implement CDD, ECDD and SCDD measures.
 
1.	The requirements differ with the physical presence of the customer or client. The Jersey Handbook mandates that the absence of the client will invoke COD or ECDD measures.
2.	The Jersey AML/CFT Handbook has a code of practice requirements, while the Guernsey AML Handbook does not include the code to practice.
3.	The Guernsey AML Handbook did not specify obligations for Business insurance firms. The Jersey Handbook provided requirements for business insurance.
4.	It should be noted that all other obligations are the same.

Appendix B: Terms and Abbreviations AML: Anti-Money Laundering
•	App: Application

•	BACS: Bankers' Automated Clearing System

•	COD: Customer Due Diligence

•	CECIS: Closed-Ended Collective Investment Scheme

•	CFT: Countering the Financing of Terrorism

•	CIS: Collective Investment Scheme

•	CMP: Compliance Monitoring Programme

•	OT: Drug Trafficking

•	EC: European Council

•	ECDD: Enhanced Customer Due Diligence

•	ESAs: European Supervisory Authorities

•	EU: European Union

•	FATF: Financial Action Task Force

•	FIS: Financial Intelligence Service

•	FIU: Financial Investigation Unit
 
•	FSB: Financial Services Business

•	FT: Financing of Terrorism

•	GP: General Partner

•	IBAN: International Bank Account Number

•	IC: Incorporated Cell

•	ICC: Incorporated Cell Company

•	IFSWF: International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds

•	IMF: International Monetary Fund

•	IOSCO: International Organisation of Securities Commissions

•	IT: Information Technology

•	LLP: Limited Liability Partnership

•	LP: Limited Partnership

•	LPP: Legal Professional Privilege

•	Ml: Management Information

•	ML: Money Laundering

•	MLCO: Money Laundering Compliance Officer

•	MLRO: Money Laundering Reporting Officer

•	MONEYVAL: The Committee of Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money Laundering and the Financing of Terrorism
•	MSP: Money Service Provider

•	MVTS: Money or Value Transfer Service

•	NATO: North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

•	NGCIS: Non-Guernsey Collective Investment Scheme

•	NPO: Non-Profit Organisation

•	NRA: National Risk Assessment

•	NRFSB: Non-Regulated Financial Services Business
 
•	OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
•	OECIS: Open-Ended Collective Investment Scheme

•	OFAC: Office of Foreign Assets Control

•	PB: Prescribed Business

•	PC: Protected Cell

•	PCC: Protected Cell Company

•	PEP: Politically Exposed Person

•	PQ: Personal Questionnaire

•	PSP: Payment Service Provider

•	RFID:  Radio-Frequency Identification

•	SCDD: Simplified Customer Due Diligence

•	SON: Specially Designated National

•	SIO: Senior-Investigating Officer

•	SWF: Sovereign Wealth Fund

•	SWIFT: Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication
•	THEMIS: The FIS Online Reporting Facility for a Disclosure of Suspicion
•	UK: United Kingdom

•	UN: United Nations

•	UNSCR: United Nations Security Council Resolutions

•	US: United States of America

Appendix C: Summary Checklist for CDD Obligations and CDD Trigger Events
The scenarios to apply CDD measures shall be followed in accordance with the provisions of the Commission. The board shall
 
apply CDD, ECDD, and SCDD measures to:

1.	Clients not physically present for the verification process

2.	Non-resident clients

3.	Politically exposed persons

4.	Clients with personal banking solutions

5.	A client with private asset holding vehicle

6.	Clients liked with high-risk countries.


E-Recruitment Implementation in Saudi Arabia
Abstract
The main aim of this study was to assess whether the e-recruitment process can be implemented in organizations in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. To understand these issues, the study deployed the case study of a big organization in Saudi Arabia. Further, it incorporated the existing literature that has discussed employee recruitment and factors that determine such performance in an organization. Data was gathered from a sample of employees oft organization under study. Statistical tools were used for data analysis. The study found out that e-recruitment saves cost and also creates a large pool of employees.
Introduction
Introduction
This chapter contains the background of the e-recruitment process and its impacts on organizational human resources. It also contains the summary definitions and base theory, the background of the host organization, the rationale for the research area, the research objectives, and the research hypothesis. It concludes with the outlined methodology and the plan of the dissertation.

Background to the study
Recruitment is a very significant aspect of Human Resource Management. It involves practices and exercises conducted by organizations with the aim of recognizing and drawing new staff (Handlogten, 2009, p. 16). Recruitment is essential in organizations because it carries out the significant function of attracting the most vital resource, human capital, into the business. Moreover, it has a strategic implication since it focuses on the need to attract highly qualified and competent staff, which can provide a competitive edge over business competitors (Boxall & Purcell, 2003, p. 44; Parry & Tyson, 2008, p. 260).
There are three factors that influence the recruitment process in the current labor market. The first factor is the tight and competitive labor markets. The shortage of skilled and competent candidates makes it extremely difficult to recruit suitable personnel. The second factor is the recruitment techniques. The recruitment process is a very difficult process and, therefore, there is a need to choose suitable means of accessing the labor market (Chartered Institute of Personnel Development, 2007, p. 22). The third and last factor is the increasing number of individuals who have access to the internet. Studies show that nearly a third of the global population has access to the internet. As a result, most companies have embraced the use of ICT in nearly all aspects of their operations (Parry & Tyson, 2008, p. 265).
Job applications through the mail are nowadays becoming very rare. In fact, most multinational corporations discourage applicants from making application mail. For example, companies like Coca-Cola, Dow Chemicals, and Vivo only have an online option for job applications. Online recruitment systems benefit not only job seekers, but also the company (Chartered Institute of Personnel Development, 2007, p. 22). Boxall and Purcell (2003) found that "online recruitment system guarantees transparency, efficiency and independent access by all the stakeholders" (p. 46).

Problem statement
Most organizations have over-relied on pay-for-performance approaches to their strategic human resource management practices. Results from past studies affirm that organizations extensively relied on pay compensation systems in an effort to improve organizational performance by positively influencing their employees' behavior (Parry & Tyson, 2008, p. 262).
Consequently, different recruitment structures have been formulated in an effort to assess the contribution to employee performance. The integration of dispersed pay structures in an organization's compensation system may culminate in negative effects. Other studies show that "the contribution of dispersed recruitment structures in employee performance might be insignificant" (Parry & Tyson, 2008, p. 262).
While many people have developed the perception that more recruitment can lead to better performance, this issue is more complex than meets the eye since employee performance is a mix of many factors, which do not necessarily end with better payment. In addition, other studies emphasize that despite the fact that the issue of the significance of relative and absolute pay has been extensively researched, numerous gaps remain unexplored (Boxall & Purcell, 2003, p. 44).
 
Research purpose and rationale
Incorporating the existing literature will lead to a better appreciation of key issues that relate to the subject that the case study will reveal. The rationale for conducting this study has arisen from the need to understand the relationship between pay level and employee recruitment. Currently, organizations increasingly appreciate human capital as a source of sustainable competitive advantage. Thus, the need to develop and retain a strong human capital base has increased considerably. However, it is imperative for organizations' management teams to appreciate the contribution of their employee recruitment systems to worker performance. Such consideration will provide the organization's management team with an insight on how to adjust their employee compensation systems.

Research objectives
This paper intends to achieve a number of objectives, which include:

1.	To evaluate the basis for the implementation of thee-recruitment processes, and

2.	To assess the factors that make the e-recruitment process a success.

Research question
The above research objectives will be assessed by taking into consideration the following research question.

1.	What is the impact of the implementation of the e-recruitment processes?

Research Hypothesis
To achieve the research objective, the proposal is based on the following null (Ho) and alternate (H1) research hypotheses.

1.	H0: The e-recruitment process has great benefits for an organization.
2.	H1: The e-recruitment process has no benefits to an organization.

Literature Review
Introduction
Online recruitment is commonly known as e-recruitment or web-based recruitment. E-recruitment has been described differently by different writers. However, the essence is the same. Handlogten (2009) defines e-recruitment as "the use of the internet to identify and draw potential candidates, which include the use of the own company website and other online platforms" (p. 16). Galanaki (2002), on the other hand, defines e-recruitment as "posting job vacancies online and letting candidates send their curriculum vitae through e-mail or electronically" (p. 33). He adds that e-recruitment can also entail remote interviews, for instance, online aptitude tests. Basically, e-recruitment systems help to match employees and employers. Corporate websites provide applicants with the opportunity to get to know more about the organization, its tradition, job prospects, and employment opportunities (Handlogten, 2009, p. 18).

E-recruitment in Saudi Arabia
Information Communication Technology (ICT) has turned out to be a core business enabler in Saudi Arabia. The "dot.com" recession of 2001, followed by the Great Recession of 2007, saw an increasing demand for information technology systems to maintain a competitive advantage at a low cost. At the same time, Technology and connectivity evolved very fast with the introduction of numerous cloud platforms and high-speed internet. It has transformed how individuals and business entities operate in the country (United Nations, 2012, p. 76).
The continuous evolution of ICT has assisted businesses in Saudi Arabia to automate their systems and discover new products and, therefore, giving them a competitive advantage in their respective industries. A number of studies have shown that the growth of multinational corporations in the country is highly attributed to their capacity to speedily leverage ICT for their own benefit. On the other hand, small and medium-size organizations are increasingly embracing this idea (United Nations, 2012, p. 77).
As a result, companies and institutions in Saudi Arabia are increasingly embracing the use of ICT to recruit new personnel. The majority of them post job vacancies on the World Wide Web (United Nations, 2012, p. 77). The falling cost of internet technology and enhanced accessibility of broadband technology have considerably affected the conventional recruitment methods. As a
 
matter of fact, the conventional frontiers that existed between the traditional media and recruitment agencies are collapsing. In the recent past, recruitment had the highest expenditure with online job advertising leading in terms of spending (United Nations, 2012, p. 78).
The growth of online recruitment methods is attributed to the benefits associated with it both from the applicant and organization's perspective. For example, increased internet access in Saudi Arabia means applicants can access companies' websites at any time of the day. In addition, companies are able to reach all the potential candidates quickly both locally and internationally. In addition, e-recruitment is very cost effective compared to the traditional recruitment methods (United Nations, 2012, p. 78). Other benefits include ease of use for applicants and organizations, access to a larger pool of candidates, greater success in finding the right candidates, and competitive advantage in the labor market (United Nations, 2012, p. 79).
The use of online recruitment methods has also been embraced by the Saudi Government. According to the latest United Nation's report, Saudi Arabia is ranked number 58 globally and 4th in the Middle East fore-governance. The United Arab Emirates is ranked first, followed by Bahrain and Oman respectively. Nearly all the government jobs are available in an e­ government portal and they can be applied via the internet (United Nations, 2012, p. 81).
E-recruitment has helped companies in Saud Arabia to generate a pool of applicants as a result of jobs posted through their websites and other online job boards. Even though they are forced to pay a fee in order to establish a direct link to their websites, the cost is considerably lower than the conventional recruitment methods (Fawzi & Almarshed, 2013). In fact, e­ recruitment has given the Saudi organizations the most vibrant solution for enhancing their relationship with job applicants. It has also improved information flow and accelerated the recruitment process (Fawzi & Almarshed, 2013).
With a touch of a computer mouse, employers in Saudi Arabia are currently able to classify vacant positions, post them on the internet, gather CVs and list qualified applicants just as simple as that. In addition, most recruitment agencies in Saudi Arabia have a safe, interlinked database and state of the art workflow system, which is often used to notify organizations about the available job seekers. This gives organizations more power over the recruitment process since they can define search parameters and prospective decisions (Fawzi & Almarshed, 2013).
Human capital is one of the major challenges for companies based in the Saudi Arabia. The labor laws limit the number of expatriates that can be hired. In addition, the country produces a relatively low number of skilled and competent. Moreover, their expertise does not match the requirements of the industry. Therefore, many of them have resorted to hiring expatriates, regardless of numerous challenges associated with hiring foreigners (Alhamad, 2014).
The cost of hiring skilled labor in Saudi Arabia is also very expensive. The high cost of skilled labor is attributed to high demand for labor in the country and scarcity of skilled and competent domestic labor. The high demand for skilled labor has also led to the escalation in wages. Companies have been forced to introduce higher remunerative packages to attract highly skilled and competent workers. In addition, the rising wages are also attributed to the increasing cost of housing and the cost of living.
For these reasons, most companies in Saudi Arabia have resorted to cost-cutting measures to reduce their wage bill and cost of staffing. The measures include hiring fresh graduates. Other measures include hiring expatriates from less developed economies who have less wage demand. Therefore, e-recruitment is like a miracle to these companies because they had to rely on foreign agents to access a pool of desired personnel (Alhamad, 2014).
Nonetheless, many employees often fail to realize their HR objectives, even though they possess the requisite technology and material resources. This mainly attributed to the existing culture in Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia is among the most tribal countries in the world and, therefore, nepotism (Wasta) plays a key role in the recruitment process. A number of organizations have realized that nepotism imposes itself when advertising vacant positions in the traditional media. As a result, these organizations have partnered with recruitment agencies to acquire the best candidates for the vacant positions. Most of these agencies operate through the World Wide Web. The partnership has helped these companies, especial banks to acquire creme de la creme in the labor market, both within and outside the country (Fawzi & Almarshed, 2013, p. 3).
In a nutshell, companies in Saudi Arabia pay a lot of attention to the role of a strategic partner. The emphasis on strategic HRM supports the idea that current organizations cannot attain competitive advantage without exploring HR strategies and trends. These strategies create a foundation for further growth and development. They also encourage companies to be more proactive that reactive in shaping their destiny. In addition, the role of a change agent is very important. HR managers are very important in enforcing the change in the organization. This is due to the fact that they are the principal custodians of organizational values and culture, which are the main strategic elements determining companies' potential.
 
E-recruitment phases
Normally, the recruitment process starts with identifying available positions. Thereafter, the recruiter is authorized to fill the vacant position. However, the position must be cautiously examined. The analysis involves the determination of the required knowledge and skills. After the identification and analysis, the position can be advertised in the media (Handlogten, 2009, p. 16). E-recruitment is different from the customary recruitment process in the sense that it uses web and technology to bolster the process. Vacant positions can be published on the company's website or career sites. Job applications can be made through the internet. In addition, further communication between company and applicants extensively relies on the internet (Parry & Tyson, 2008, p. 265).
Cappelli (2001) defines the online recruitment procedure in three phases; "the first phases involve attracting potential candidates" (p. 140). The applicants can be attracted by the company's status, image, online tools and other ways that can attract as many candidates as possible to the company's website. The company can also strengthen their HR image by providing information regarding various job positions within the company and employment conditions. The second phase involves sorting candidates based on their online test scores and qualifications. The third phase involves managing applicants' contacts, which should be done on time. Most companies often use automated hiring systems to contact qualified applicants very fast before they are taken by other organizations (Cappelli, 2001, p. 141).
Pin, Laorden, and Saenz-Diez (2001) also described the e-recruitment stages. They stress that "the e-recruitment process only differs from the conventional recruitment process because of the use of e-enabled technology" (p. 33).
According to Pin et al. (2001), thee-recruitment process takes after a methodological HR planning process, which involves strategic analysis and planning of manpower getting into and out of the organization. However, thee-recruitment process neglects a fourth phase that is considered very crucial in the Human Resource Management process. This is concerned with the human aspect of the process, which involve making a telephone call, arranging for a meeting and exchanging handshakes. Pine et al. (2001) argues that thee-recruitment process is increasingly neglecting the human touch.

Elements and success indices of e-recruitment implementation
Implementation is a broadly researched topic and in every research implementation is defined differently (Krishnan & Singh, 2006; Parry, 2006, p. 4). Handlogten (2009) defines the implementation as "the execution of strategy or plan to actualize change" (p. 21). He sees IT implementation as a step between the adoption stage and the actualization stage. IT implementation involves the formation of strategy, project definition and introduction of new technology into the organization. However, Krishnan and Singh (2006) found that "the implementation phase is a stage after selection HR information system" (p. 33). He explains that the IT implementation involves all the operations from the adoption of new technology to the actual use of the technology.
Some writers view that IT implementation is considered complete after the realization of change, whereas others believe that implementation is complete after the realization of its benefits (Cappelli, 2001, p. 145). Ruta (2005) on the other hand, argue that "the success of e-recruitment implementation depends on whether the system is effectively executed and has a positive impact on the organization" (p. 38). He is among those who subscribe to the idea that e-recruitment implementation is complete when the anticipated benefits are realized. For this study, the anticipated benefits are referred to as results of e-recruitment implementation. Therefore, e-recruitment implementation is successful when the anticipated results are realized.
Ruta (2005) emphasizes "the significance of a system in the successful implementation of e-recruitment" (p. 40). In this case, the system includes technology and members of the organization. Members of the organization are expected to use the technology directly or support its use. In addition, the technology must fit with the values of the targeted users to guarantee successful implementation. Last but not least, the technology has to be used frequently, consistently and diligently so as to realize its full benefits.
Handlogten (2009) found that, "successful implementation of e-recruitment also calls for proper management" (p. 22). He states that "it does not matter how much preparation has been carried out, nor how talented is the task group, the critical factor is excellent management''. He adds that in most cases thee-recruitment process does not achieve the expected results due to poor implementation. As a result, good management is a critical aspect of e-recruitment implementation. In a nutshell, the project team must engage both the technological and organizational aspect of e-recruitment implantation.
 
This means e-recruitment implementation is more than just substituting the medium like in the conventional recruitment process. The application of the system requires more than a change in technology (Panayotopoulou, Vakola & Galanaki, 2005, p. 288).
Krishnan and Singh (2006) confirmed that "the e-HRM is very much regarded as an information technology implementation by organizations" (p. 30). Yet, when really carrying out the implementations, organizations recognized that e-HRM implementation also calls for a change in organizations. Therefore, e-recruitment implementation requires total support from the management.
From a technical perspective, the important factors to be considered during e-recruitment implementation include system features or strength, and the application of the system. Proper utilization of the system is significant because e-recruitment implementation can be considered as a failure when the system is used less habitually, less consistently or less steadily than required. This is regarded as the system's strength (Parry & Tyson, 2008, p. 269).
Facilitators of thee-recruitment implementation
In order to identify the facilitators of e-recruitment implementation, the concept of e-recruitment features and system's strength must be considered (Handlogten, 2009, p. 25). There are three significant models that have always been used to identify technology enablers, namely: D&M IS success model, the Technology Acceptance Model, and the End-User Computing Satisfaction model (Handlogten, 2009, p. 26). The most noticeable contrast between the three models is their viewpoint on IT implementation success. The D&M IS success model assesses the net benefit of the implementation process (Delone & McLean, 2003, p. 12).
The Technology Acceptance Model, on the other hand, looks at the rate in which the technology is embraced and used in the organization. Lastly, the End-User Computing Satisfaction Model assesses the end-users' satisfaction level. Satisfaction is defined as the attitude towards the new technology or system (Handlogten, 2009, p. 27).
To determine e-recruitment success, the Technology Acceptance Model tries to envisage individual approval of e-HRM by gauging their intent and capacity to describe their intent. Anchored in longitudinal research, the model measures the efficacy and ease of use by the end-users in terms of mindset and individual norms (Handlogten, 2009, p. 26). The model has been tested in many studies. According to these studies, the supposed efficacy appears to have more weight than ease of use (Krishnan & Singh, 2006, p. 54).
The model has received a great deal of support, but that does mean it has not been criticized. Some of its challengers argue that the Technology Acceptance Model has been derived from self-reports. In addition, most of the empirical studies on the model involve students instead of the corporate world. Lastly, studies on the model have always put a lot of focus on system development applications (Handlogten, 2009, p. 27).
A tool has been developed to measure the end-user satisfaction. It merges convenience and information product items to assess the clients' level of satisfaction (Krishnan & Singh, 2006, p. 54). Etezadi-Amoli and Farhoomand (1996) proposed 12 items, which were used to assess the component of client satisfaction. The five components are content, precision, configuration, usability and timeliness. Etezadi-Amoli and Farhoomand (1996) also discovered a considerable variation in end­ user performance, which is described six attitudinal variables pertaining to end user satisfaction. Yet, they claim that additional hypothetical foundation is missing and, therefore, the results must be treated with care.
D&M IS success model gauges the success of new innovations. It is based on five significant concepts. The first two include information and system quality. They have a considerable impact on users' intent and satisfaction, which consequently affects the performance of a person and an organization (Delone & McLean, 2003, p. 14). Many studies have found the model to be valid. This is because there is empirical evidence showing that the model is portrayed by logical force and, therefore, explains the information system's success. Handlogten (2009) asserts that "the inclusion of the supposed usefulness to substitute use was very important, given that use is basically an action and do not reflect achievement in circumstances where usage is compulsory" (p. 27).
Looking at the three models, it is evident that the Technology Acceptance Model and the End-User Computing Satisfaction model tend to be characterized by sentiments, for example, the level of satisfaction and approval. Even though D&M IS success model also incorporates user satisfaction like the other two models, it centers on ultimate advantages. Therefore, the D&M IS success model is taking further strides when taking into account ultimate benefits. The net benefits include quantitative measures, like enhanced process duration, diminished expenses, or better returns. The model provides an all-encompassing measure, and not just a sentimental measure of IT viability and achievement (Delone & McLean, 2003, p. 15; Handlogten, 2009, p. 29).
 
Last but not least, among the three models, D&M IS success model is the only model that incorporates system's service quality. Service quality was included in the model due to the fact information and system quality only assesses the system on its own (Delone & McLean, 2003, p. 15). Service quality is always undermined, yet it is very significant in information system's success. For this reason, the inclusion of service quality in the D&M IS success model offered a more comprehensive overview.
Innovation and service quality as a facilitator of e-recruitment system efficiency
After expounding on different information technology implementation efficiency assessment models, it is important to take a look at information technology implementation taking into account e-recruitment implementation. It is also vital to incorporate the qualities of information technology in e-recruitment implementation. In order to achieve this, a construct is required to gauge the quality of the technology itself. As a result, the study will incorporate the quality of innovation as a construct for the implementation of e-recruitment. This alludes to the nature of e-recruitment technology and the information derived from it.
Therefore, the inclusion of this construct will make sure that the technology itself is assessed.

However, another construct is needed to strengthen the general assessment of IT efficiency. This is linked to the service offered by the technology. As already been mentioned, this element has been undermined and sometimes totally ignored by many models. Delone and McLean (2003) define service quality as "the general support offered by the service provider" (p. 20). It is applicable regardless of whether the support is offered by a department within the organization or outsourced. Krishnan and Singh (2006) found that, "service quality is an old concept and it has always been ignored due to too much emphasis on the IT product and the technology itself" (p. 56).
Nonetheless, service quality is not easy to assess compared to product quality. This is attributed to the fact that service quality has numerous attributes that are unlike the product quality, for example, immaterialness, varied content and intertwined state (Handlogten, 2009, p. 29).
Mostly taking into account its immaterialness, service quality is harder to gauge. This is attributed to the absence of substantial evidence. The technology suppliers may find it difficult to comprehend clients' perception of their service and service quality. When the suppliers know how a service is perceived by its clients, they will have the capacity to enhance the service while the clients will have the capacity to influence the measurements accordingly. This ideology is founded on the disinformation model, which states that the client's satisfaction level is linked to the extent and bearing of the disinformation experience.
Disinformation is associated with the individual's earlier expectation (Handlogten, 2009, p. 30).

By concentrating just on the product characteristic of the technology, its achievement may be miscalculated (Ruta, 2005, p. 42). In order to capture this, service quality must be incorporated in the study as a construct to assess e-recruitment implementation success. Service quality is very crucial for poor service may cause massive loss of clients and revenue. This is attributed to the fact that IT increasingly becoming a determinant of the nature of the relationship that exists between companies and their clients (Ruta, 2005, p. 43).
A specific instrument was developed to measure service quality. The instrument is known as SERVQUAL or RATER. This is basically a quality management framework developed in the mid-80s by Parasuraman and his colleagues (Handlogten, 2009, p. 30). With the rise of e-business, organizations are increasingly collaborating with their clients via ICT channels. For this reason, the above instrument was developed to measure service quality delivered by ICT channels, as perceived by clients (Ruta, 2005, p. 43).
Earlier studies have shown that service quality increases client satisfaction and retention, and subsequently business performance (Handlogten, 2009, p. 31). Therefore, applying this concept toe-recruitment will be very crucial in motivating clients. In this case, the clients refer to the end-users of thee-recruitment system (Delone & McLean, 2003, p. 21). Poor service quality can result in loss of clients since they may not be able to utilize the system or may decline to work with it. As a result, this could result of the lack of competitive advantage in the labor market or inefficient recruitment process. In summary, the technological strength of e-recruitment implementation relies on product quality and service quality.

E-recruitment management as a facilitator of e-recruitment implementation
As already been mentioned, management's support is a crucial factor fore-recruitment implementation (Krishnan & Singh, 2006, p. 56). This subsection explores the role of management support in e-recruitment implementation. The implementation of new technology involves the formation of strategy, project definition and operational activities. All these require massive support from the management.
 
The project manager plays a very crucial role during the implementation process. A project manager who does not have the capacity to successfully manage the implementation process risk not meeting the target. This includes finishing the project on time and within the stipulated budget (Newton, 2006, p. 6). Project manager always acts as a team leader. Team members are also required to have the requisite knowledge and skills because they also have a significant impact on the implementation process. Lack of requisite knowledge and skills on the part of the team members could lead to the inability to carry out the task at hand. In addition, project implementation requires an utmost commitment from the team members, which include the project manager. In case they are not, they may not deliver the promised scope (Newton, 2006, p. 7).
The success of thee-recruitment implementation also relies on meticulous planning (Handlogten, 2009, p. 31). Newton (2006) describes a project plan as "an expansive account of all the crucial activities that are required to conclude a project" (p. 18).
Project planning includes collecting vital information relating to project duration, required resources, project team and their responsibilities and the implementation process. Project planning is part of the strategic management process, which involves the management, project team and experts.
Strategic management entails three major processes, namely: strategy formation, strategy implementation and reformulation of strategy. Strategy formation is further subdivided into three phases, that is, the creation of a strategic identity, execution of strategy analysis and formulation of strategy. The creation of a strategic identity is a cyclic process, which involves a continuous exchange of information from the different life cycle (Boxall & Purcell, 2003, p. 23).
The creation of a strategic identity and strategy analysis is regarded by many as the most difficult phase of e-recruitment implementation process. The creation of a strategic identity involves putting together a mission, vision and strategic intent. The vision and mission must be consistent with organizational values. It also involves the identification of the core competencies and capabilities of an organization (Parry & Tyson, 2008, p. 160; Boxall & Purcell, 2003, p. 24). Strategy analysis entails analysis of internal and external environmental factors (industry foresight), identification of the existing concepts and capabilities, and identification of the requisite concepts (Boxall & Purcell, 2003, p. 25).
On the other hand, strategy implementation is subdivided into significant phases. They include articulation and codifying of strategy, evaluation of strategies, elaboration of the strategies, and promotion of the strategies and the execution of the strategies (Boxall & Purcell, 2003, p. 25). Strategy articulation refers to the externalization of the strategy and its implementation in an overt manner. Codification, on the other hand, refers to the translation of strategies into tangible and measurable objectives. The evaluation process looks for consistency, consonance, competitive advantage and viability of the strategy.
Strategy elaboration encompasses the transformation of strategy into executable and outfitted (Boxall & Purcell, 2003, p. 26).

Strategy promotion refers to far-reaching and calculated campaign to the acknowledgment of the novel strategy among the stakeholders. Last but not least, strategy execution entails strategy discharge and incessant control of strategic performance. Owing to constant changes in the internal and external environment, strategic re-evaluation, and re-formulation is very important. The revaluation process may be elicited by regular reassessment process, unproductive results, and a disparity between the expected and actual results and changes in the top management. It should be noted that an excellent strategy does not need continuous reformulation (Boxall & Purcell, 2003, p. 26).

Information Technology and Personnel Management
Because of the significance of human capital in the implementation of corporate strategy, a rational role of HR is to be part of the development and carrying out of the strategic process. Therefore, the HR department should act as a strategic partner to the organization and not a mere administrative service provider as being experienced in many organizations presently.
Corporate strategy is described as the company's targets and how they are to be achieved, and it is the latter part that the HR department should put emphasis on. The HR department ensures that the company has enough capabilities to effectively carry out its strategies. However, this calls for the reorganization of the company than the reorganization of the HR as an administrative function. The reorganization involves embracing new technologies in the HR processes.
Panayotopoulou et al. (2005) carried out a study to establish the relationship between information technology and Human Resource Management (HRM). They established that "the collaboration between information technology and HRM is crucial in the adoption of e-HRM" (p. 280). For that reason, the collaboration between IT and HRM guarantees inclusion of e-recruitment into the HR process (Krishnan & Singh, 2006, p. 54). Panayotopoulou et al. (2005) found that, "the right collaboration between the two is a response for the ever-increasing demand for quality service" (p. 280). Taking this into consideration, needs assessment is crucial in the collaboration between IT and HRM so as to identify what is required of the system. Proper need assessment will guarantee delivery of correct needs (Panayotopoulou et al., 2005, p. 280).
 
Studies on e-HRM show that the HR division did not have a chance to choose the package they would prefer to implement as per their needs. As a result, there was a lack of congruence between system needs and capacity, which made it impossible to integrate the system into the HR processes. Subsequently, this led to poor service quality (Handlogten, 2009, p. 31). Increased training transformed the conventional HR set-up into e-HR. Enhanced knowledge and skills led to the optimal utilization of the system features (Panayotopoulou et al., 2005, p. 280).
Numerous studies, particularly management and marketing studies have been carried out on the inter-business relationship between online recruitment agencies and businesses across the globe. Inter-business outsourcing relationship was derived from the concept of outsourcing and partnering. They define inter-business outsourcing relationship as a linkage between service providers and clients arising from the contractual agreement. The contractual agreement highlights the benefits to be attained by each party. The relationship/partnership between IT outsourcing firms and their clients helps in minimizing risks, increases predictability and, therefore, reduces uncertainty. Therefore, the outsourcing relationship has a significant impact on the outcome of the e-recruitment process.
Research Methodology
Introduction
The methodology is the process of instructing the ways to do the research. It is, therefore, convenient for conducting the research and for analyzing the research questions. The process of methodology insists that much care should be given to the kinds and nature of procedures to be adhered to in accomplishing a given set of procedures or an objective (Blanchard & Cathy, 2002). The purpose of this research proposal is to create a room for further research that will assess the relationship between the employees' pay and their level of performance. Consequently, the research study is exploratory. Exploratory research studies provide researchers an opportunity to assess areas that have not been extensively researched (Saunders, Thornhill, & Lewis, 2009).
Therefore, engaging in exploratory studies contributes to the development of additional knowledge on the issue or phenomenon under investigation. This goal will be achieved by testing the stipulated hypotheses. To undertake the research study, a comprehensive research methodology will be integrated. This part includes the research design, the sample and the methods that were used in gathering information. It also contains the data analysis methods, validity and reliability of data and the limitation of the study.

Research Design
There are three types of research design: exploratory research, descriptive research and causal research (Blanchard & Cathy, 2002). Exploratory research mainly explores the nature of the problem in order to draw inferences. In this scenario, the researcher is in a good position to understand the problem under investigation. The flow of exploratory research involves identifying the problem and seeking to find the appropriate solutions and new ideas. Exploratory research is mostly applicable in circumstances where the structure of the research problem is not definite. The interview is a good example of the methods that will be used to gather information in this kind of research.
On the other hand, descriptive research is mostly applicable in circumstances where the structure of the research problem is explicit. This kind of research is used when the researcher expects to distinguish the various observed facts in a sample or a population. In addition, descriptive research is normally used by the researcher when the researcher has a prior understanding of the problem under investigation. Causal research is the kind of research whereby there is a clear structure of the research problem. In this case, the researcher is interested to explore on the cause-effect relationship. The causes are identified, analyzed and the extent of the effects is reviewed (Blanchard & Cathy, 2002).
Considering the exploratory nature of the research study, the research will adopt the mixed research design. The study will take into account the qualitative and quantitative research designs. The choice of the mixed research design has arisen from the need to improve the quality of the research study. First, the integration of the qualitative research design will aid in the generation of adequate data from the field to support the study. Moreover, the research will have an opportunity to collect data from the natural setting, hence improving the relevance of the research study. In the course of implementing the qualitative research design, the study will take into account the grounded theory.
Strang (2015) found out that "the grounded theory entails the discoveries from facts that are systematically obtained from social research with the objective of developing a theory" (p. 449). Subsequently, incorporation of the grounded theory in the qualitative research design will enable the research to elucidate the issue under investigation. For example, the research study
 
will contribute to a further understanding on the importance of adopting a multi-dimensional approach in formulating the employee compensation policies. Conversely, the quantitative research design will aid in improving the effectiveness with which the research data are analyzed and interpreted by the target research audience such as organizations human resource managers.

Case Study Approach
The case study is an approach of methodology that is applied when a comprehensive research or investigation is required. The case study is widely applied in sociological studies, but of late it is commonly applied in research institutions. Case study approach has procedures to be followed; hence, the researcher is required to stick to the guiding rules and principles so as to produce the best results. Through a case study approach, the researcher has access to a wide range of data sources; as a result of this, case study results are always very comprehensive and in-depth.
The case study research does not entail sampling; hence it is beneficial to select the cases in a relevant manner in order to maximize on what should be learnt. Through a case study approach, relevant issues that form the basis of the study are thoroughly exploited. In addition, issues that appear to be more complex are brought to light through the use of case study as a research approach. The basic steps to be followed when structuring a case study approach are: the research questions should be clearly stated and defined, choose the cases and the data collection and analysis techniques, arrange to gather data, process and analyze the collected data, and make a report with regard to the analyzed data.

Population and Sampling
There are two popularly used procedures for sampling. The sampling procedures include prospect sampling and non-prospect sampling. In a probability sampling procedure, the samples are representative of the population. This is because all the entries have a chance of being selected. On the other hand, items in the non-probability sampling do not have an equal chance. In this scenario, all the items in the population do not have equal chances of being selected. The data for the study was collected among the employees of the organization under study. The employees were used because their profiles fit the context of this study. Therefore, the employees were an excellent choice due to the fact that many of them have had the organization experience. Due to the fact that all the employees could not be accessible, a non-probability sampling procedure was employed in this study.
A pilot test was conducted in order to ensure that the questionnaires were reliable and valid. After the pre-test, the questionnaire was edited by removing and changing some words. A pre-test was done again to ten additional respondents just to be sure that the questionnaire was now very reliable and very valid. The study targeted employees who work with an organization in Saudi Arabia. The organization preferred to remain anonymous, thus, for the sake of this study the organization will be known as 'Organization A: as the study population. Considering the fact that Organization A is a big entity, the research intended to evaluate the application of pay on employee performance.
The choice of Organization A has arisen from the fact that it has integrated high pay as one of its employee motivation strategies. Conducting a study on the entire population is not manageable due to the high cost and the amount of time that has to be spent. Consequently, the research study will take into account the sampling technique. To make the study manageable scholars found that "the research will integrate the simple random sampling technique in constructing the research sample" (Scott, 2011, p. 90).
This technique will ensure that bias in conducting the study is eliminated. A sample of 169 respondents who will be selected from Organization A will be developed. The study will take into account both males and females in constructing the research sample. The study assumes that the selected research sample will be representative of the workforce perception of the relationship between pay and performance. The choice of these regions has arisen from the need to understand the impact of social and cultural diversity on the employee perception and hence performance.

Data Collection and Instrumentation
In any research that is conducted, there are basic stages that are involved in regards to the shaping of the research. These stages include: understanding the research problem, the conceptual framework of the research, data collection, data analysis and interpretations, and drawing inferences and making recommendations. In this study, quantitative research method was used to test the hypotheses that were formulated. The quantitative research method is very instrumental in harnessing mathematical models that are enshrined to natural facts. This type of research can be measured and the researcher is able to construct a conceptual framework using the existing theories.
 
The adoption of primary sources played a fundamental role in improving the relevance of the research findings. To collect data from the field, the interviewing technique was integrated. Consequently, a set of questionnaires was developed. The questionnaires acted as a guide in conducting the interview. The questionnaires were mainly composed of open-ended questionnaires to provide the respondents an opportunity to answer the required issues based on their opinion. The questionnaires were administered to the respondents directly through online media. Thus, the data collection method entailed an online survey. Adopting this method of administration is informed by the need to minimize the cost of the study considering the fact that respondents are geographically dispersed.

Data Analysis and Presentation
The collected data will be analyzed quantitatively. This goal will be achieved by incorporating quantitative data analysis tools such as tabulation, use of graphs, percentages, and charts. Considering the fact that the research study has integrated the qualitative research design, the data analysis and presentation method will entail the adoption of the textual presentation technique. This technique will be implemented by using statements that comprise numerals.
One of the textual presentation tools that will be adopted in analyzing the research data entails the Likert scale. By using this tool, the research will be in a position to evaluate the qualitative data using point scales such as the 5-point Likert scale. In addition to the above technique, the research will integrate the Microsoft Excel data analysis technique. The adoption of this technology will play a fundamental role in improving the effectiveness and efficiency with which the collected data will be analyzed using tables, charts, and graphs. Moreover, incorporation of the Microsoft technique will play a fundamental role in improving the ease with which the research data will be interpreted.

Limitations of the study
There have been a considerable measure of concerns on extra-budgetary costs of gathering of the information, paying little mind to whether the accumulated information is truly genuine or not and whether there may be an unequivocal conclusion when translating and breaking down the information. What's more, a few representatives were hesitant to offer some data that was private and perilous in the hands of their rivals. This represented an extraordinary test in the examination as the specialist needed to take a more drawn out time to discover workers why should willingly give out sufficient data.
Findings, Data Analysis and Interpretation
Introduction
This section covers the analysis of the data, presentation and interpretation. The results were analyzed using SPPS, ANOVA, regression and correlation analysis.
Characteristics of the sample
In order to understand the demographic information about the participants, the distribution of gender, age, education level, income, and time period employed in the Organization A are summarized in the following sections.
Gender
Table 4.1 Gender distribution


Gender	N=169
Female	78 (46.2 %)
Male	91(53.8 %)
Total	169 (100%)
 
 
Figure 4.1 Gender percentages

The distribution of gender is summarized in Table 4.1 and Figure 4.1, according to the results; there are 78 females and 91 males, composed 46.2% and 53.8% of the sample respectively.

Age
Table 4.2 Age distribution









Figure 4.2 Age percentages
 
The distribution of age is summarized in Table 4.2 and Figure 4.2 above. According to the results, there are 47.9% of the participants aged between 26 and 35, which is the largest proportion, followed by participants aged between 36 and 45, composed 33.7% of the sample, and participants aged between 46 and 55, accounted 12.4% of the sample. Finally, participants aged above 55 or between 18 and 25 composed 4.7% and 1.2% of the sample respectively.
Education level
Table 4.3 Education distribution

Education	N=169 (%)
High school or below	4(2.4%)
Diploma	20(11.8%)
Bachelor degree	62(36.7%)
Postgraduate degree or above	83(49.1%)
Total	169(100%)

Figure 4.3 Education percentages

n terms of the education level, nearly half of the participants (49.1%) have a postgraduate degree or above, which is the largest proportion, followed by participants who have a bachelor degree, composed 36.7% of the sample, and participants who have a diploma, composed 11.8% of the sample. There are only 2.5% of the participants have high school or below degree.
Income
Table 4.4 Income distribution








 
 
Figure 4.4 Income percentages

Regarding the income of the participants, 39.6% of the participants indicate that they have income above 5000, which is the argest proportion, followed by participants who have income between 3001 and 5000, composed 31.4% of the sample, and participants who have income between 2001 and 3000, composed 16.6% of the sample. There are 10.7% of the participants have income below 1000 and 1.8% of the participants have income between 1000 and 2000.
Time period employed in the Organization A
Table 4.5 Time period employed in the organization

Times	N=169 (%)
Less than 3 times	35(20.7%)
4-7 times	38(22.5%)
7-10 times	41(24.3%)
More than 10 times	55(32.5%)
Total	169(100%)

Figure 4.5 Time period employed in the organization
 
Table 4.5 and Figure 4.5 above summarized the time period the participants have been employed in the Organization A. According to the results, 32.5% of the participants have stayed more than 10 years, which is the largest proportion, followed by participants who have stayed between 7 and 70 years, composed 24.3% of the sample, and participants who have stayed between 4 and 7 years, composed 22.5% of the sample. In addition, there are 35 participants have stayed Organization A less than 3 years, comprised 20.7% of the sample.

Reliability Analysis
Reliability analysis is often used to evaluate whether the multiple instrument items are measuring the same variable or concept (Blanchard & Cathy, 2002). In SPSS, the Cronbach's Alpha value is normally used to measure the reliability of the various variables. The minimum requirement for the value of Cronbach's Alpha is 0.7 to ensure that the items are internally consistent and reliable. In the exploratory study, the Cronbach's Alpha value of 0.6 can also be accepted. In this study, the various measurement items are adopted from previous studies, thus, the minimum value is set at 0.7. The corrected-item total correlation (CITC) is also included to evaluate the reliability of the individual item.
If the CICT is below 0.5, then the item cannot reliably measure the corresponding variable and should be excluded from further analysis (Blanchard & Cathy, 2002). The Cronbach's Alpha if item deleted indicate whether the Cronbach's Alpha value is decreased or increased after excluded this item. Thus, if this value is above the Cronbach' Alpha value for the variable, the item should then be excluded from further analysis. Table 4.6 summarizes the results.
Table 4.6 Reliability Analysis for Variables


Variables	Item	CITC	Cronbach's Alpha if Item Deleted	Cronbach's Alpha
Organization A Knowledge	V1	0.646	0.822	0.836
	V2	0.725	0.747	
	V3	0.725	0.746	
Environmental Concern	V4	0.611	0.781	0.817
	vs	0.738	0.719	
	V6	0.725	0.727	
	V7	0.486	0.806	
Cost-saving	vs	0.577	0.698	0.761
	V9	0.577	0.696	
	V10	0.623	0.644	
Quality recruitment	V11	0.581	0.634	0.739
	V12	0.620	0.585	
	V13	0.594	0.733	
Quicker recruitment process	V14	0.770	0.872	0.898
	V15	0.780	0.868	
	V16	0.631	0.801	
	V17	0.777	0.871	
	V18	0.800	0.864	
Subjective Norms	V19	0.709	0.751	0.833
	V20	0.675	0.786	
	V21	0.694	0.767	
 
Success in finding the candidate	V22	0.723	0.750	0.837
V23	0.691	0.782	
V24	0.684	0.789	


According to the results, the Cronbach's alpha value of the Organization A knowledge, environmental concern, cost-saving, quality recruitment, quicker recruitment process, subjective norms, and success in finding the candidate are 0.836, 0.817, 0.761, 0.739, 0.898, 0.833, and 0.837, which are all above the minimum requirement of 0.7. In addition, the CICT for individual items are all above the minimum requirement of 0.5 and the Cronbach's Alpha if deleted for individual items are all below the Cronbach's Alpha value. These results demonstrate that these items are internally consistent and reliable, and can be used for further analysis.

Frequency analysis
Organization P:s knowledge frequency analysis
Table 4.7 The Organization As knowledge frequency analysis


Question	Response	N=169 (%)	Mean scores
Compared to the average person, I am familiar with the organization's human resources policies	1. Strongly Disagree	3 (1.8%)	3.8047
	2.Disagree	6 (3.6%)	
	3.Neutral	42 (24.9%)	
	4.Agree	88 (52.1%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	30 (17.8%)	
Compared to my friends, I am familiar with the organization's compensation programs	1.Strongly Disagree	1 (0.6%)	3.6213
	2.Disagree	13 (7.7%)	
	3.Neutral	56 (33.1%)	
	4.Agree	78 (46.2%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	21 (12.4%)	
Compared to my colleagues, I am familiar with the organization's employees' benefits.	1.Strongly Disagree	2 (1.2%)	3.6568
	2.Disagree	12 (7.1%)	
	3.Neutral	53 (31.4%)	
	4.Agree	77 (45.6%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	25 (14.8%)	
Total		169 (100%)	3.69
 
 

Figure 4.7: Organization knowledge.As can be seen from Table 4.7 and Figure 4.7, more than half of the participants are familiar with the Organization A knowledge. There are 52.1% of the participants indicate that "Compared to the average person, I am familiar with the organization's human resources policies" and 46.2% of the participants indicate that "Compared to my friends, I am familiar with the organization's compensation programs". From the total score of these 3 items measuring Organization A:s knowledge, a large group of participants have a score of 11 or 12. To gain a clearer picture of the participants' Organization A:s knowledge, the items measuring Organization A:s knowledge were aggregated. The aggregated mean value was 3.69, suggesting that participants have medium level knowledge of the Organization A.

Environmental concern frequency analysis
Table 4.8 Environmental concern frequency analysis


Question	Response	N=169 (%)	Mean scores
I am extremely worried about the state of the world's recruitment environment and what it will mean for my future	1.Strongly Disagree	1 (0.6%)	3.8284
	2.Disagree	9 (5.3%)	
	3.Neutral	41 (24.3%)	
	4.Agree	85 (50.3%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	33 (19.5%)	
Mankind is severely abusing the recruitment environment	1.Strongly Disagree	3 (1.8%)	3.6095
	2.Disagree	12 (7.1%)	
	3.Neutral	55 (32.5%)	
	4.Agree	77 (45.6%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	22 (13%)	
 

Humans must live in harmony with nature in order to survive	1.Strongly Disagree	2 (1.2%)	3.6805
	2.Disagree	10 (5.9%)	
	3.Neutral	54 (32%)	
	4.Agree	77 (45.6%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	26 (15.4%)	
I think recruitment's environmental problems are very important	1.Strongly Disagree	3 (1.8%)	3.9053
	2.Disagree	4 (2.4%)	
	3.Neutral	37 (21.9%)	
	4.Agree	87 (51.5%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	38 (22.5%)	
Total		169 (100%)	3.76


Figure 4.8 Environmental concern frequency analyses.

Table 4.8 shows the overall responses to the environmental concern among participants. According to the results, the mean value of all measurement items was between 3 and 4. Thus, the participants' attitude, concern was at a medium level. By analysing the frequency, it can be seen that more than half of the participants have expressed their concern regarding the recruitment's environmental problem. In order to gain a more detailed picture of the level of environmental concern, the aggregate mean score was classified into three levels: low (below 2), medium (2-4), and high (4-5). The aggregate mean score was 3.76, suggesting a medium level of environmental concern. The overall scores of the items measuring environmental concern were summarized, and it is found that the range was 16, with scores ranging from 5 to 20. The majority of the participants have an overall score between 14 and 16.

Cost-saving frequency analysis
Table 4.9 Cost-saving frequency analysis


Question	Response	N=169 (%)	Mean scores
 

This Organization A offers a good service that is worth its recruitment costs	1.Strongly Disagree	1 (0.6%)	3.8876
	2.Disagree	13 (7.7%)	
	3.Neutral	34 (20.1%)	
	4.Agree	77 (45.6%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	44 (26%)	
The recruitment costs are acceptable	1.Strongly Disagree	4 (2.4%)	3.9231
	2.Disagree	4 (2.4%)	
	3.Neutral	30 (17.8%)	
	4.Agree	94 (55.6%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	37 (21.9%)	
Compared to recruitment costs of other organizations, this Organization A incurs fair costs	1.Strongly Disagree	2 (1.2%)	4.1361
	2.Disagree	5 (3%)	
	3.Neutral	23 (13.6%)	
	4.Agree	77 (45.6%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	62 (36.7%)	

 		169 (100%)	
 


Figure 4.9 Distribution of cost-saving score.

Table 4.9 summarized the frequency analysis for items measuring cost-saving. According to the results, the majority of the participants agree or strongly agree that "This Organization A offers a good service that is worth its recruitment costs "The recruitment costs are acceptable and "Compared to the recruitment costs of other organizations, this Organization A incurs fair costs': The aggregated mean value of cost-saving is 3.98, nearly 4, suggesting that participants have a positive attitude towards the cost-saving of the Organization A. Figure 4.9 summarized the score of the items measuring cost-saving. As can be seen from the results, the majority of the score ranged between 10 and 15, indicating a relatively higher level positive attitude towards cost-saving.
 
Quality recruitment frequency analysis	
Table 4.70 Quality recruitment frequency analysis	

 	
Response	
N=169 (%)

 	1.Strongly Disagree	1 (0.6%)
	2.Disagree	6 (3.6%)
	3.Neutral	67 (39.6%)
	4.Agree	64 (37.9%)
	5.Strongly Agree	31 (18.3%)

 	1.Strongly Disagree	3 (1.8%)
	2.Disagree	4 (2.4%)
	3.Neutral	25 (14.8%)
	4.Agree	86 (50.9%)
	5.Strongly Agree	51 (30.2%)
	1.Strongly Disagree
3 (1.8%)
	2.Disagree	5 (3%)
	3.Neutral	45 (26.6%)
	4.Agree	87 (51.5%)
	5.Strongly Agree	29 (17.2%)

 		169 (100%)


Figure 4.10 Distribution of quality recruitment score.

Table 4.10 summarized the frequency analysis for items measuring quality recruitment. According to the results, more than half of the participants agree or strongly agree that "The e-recruitment processes are reliable and helpful "The e-recruitment processes are professional'; and "The e-recruitment processes respond to inquiries quickly': The aggregated mean value of
 
cost-saving is 3.85, suggesting that quality recruitment is at medium to high level. Figure 4.10 summarized the score of the items measuring quality recruitment. As can be seen from the results, the majority of the score ranged between 10 and 13, which also indicate a medium to high level quality recruitment perception.
Quicker recruitment process frequency analysis
Table 4.11Quicker recruitment process frequency analysis


Question	Response	N=169 (%)	Mean scores
The e-recruitment processes is comfortable	1.Strongly Disagree	0 (0%)	3.7751
	2.Disagree	7 (4.1%)	
	3.Neutral	52 (30.8%)	
	4.Agree	82 (48.5%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	28 (16.6%)	
The e-recruitment processes is efficient	1.Strongly Disagree	4 (2.4%)	3.8284
	2.Disagree	9 (5.3%)	
	3.Neutral	32 (18.9%)	
	4.Agree	91 (53.8%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	33 (19.5%)	
The e-recruitment processes is flexible	1.Strongly Disagree	5 (3%)	3.7692
	2.Disagree	4 (2.4%)	
	3.Neutral	43 (25.4%)	
	4.Agree	90 (53.3%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	27 (16%)	
The e-recruitment processes is appropriate	1.Strongly Disagree	0 (0%)	3.7692
	2.Disagree	7 (4.1%)	
	3.Neutral	52 (30.8%)	
	4.Agree	83 (49.1%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	27 (16%)	
The e-recruitment processes is better	1.Strongly Disagree	5 (3%)	3.8107
	2.Disagree	10 (5.9%)	
	3.Neutral	31 (18.3%)	
	4.Agree	89 (52.7%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	34 (20.1%)	
Total		169 (100%)	3.79
 
 
Figure 4.11 Quicker recruitment process frequency distribution.

Quicker recruitment
Table 4.71 summarized the frequency analysis for items measuring quicker recruitment process. According to the results, more than half of the participants agree or strongly agree that "The e-recruitment processes is comfortable; "The e-recruitment processes is efficient; "The e-recruitment processes is flexible; "The e-recruitment processes is appropriate; "The e­ recruitment processes is better': The aggregated mean value of cost-saving is 3.79, suggesting that the quicker recruitment process is at medium to high level. Figure 4.77 summarized the score of the items measuring organization facility. As can be seen from the results, the majority of the score ranged between 78 and 22, which also indicate a medium to high level organization facility perception.

Subjective norms frequency analysis
Table 4.12 Subjective norms frequency analysis

 
Question

Most stakeholders who are important to the organization think the organization should implement e-recruitment









Most stakeholders who are important to the organization would want the organization to continue using e-recruitment
 
Response	N=169 (%)

1.	Strongly	1 (0.6%) Disagree
2.	Disagree	19 (11.2%)

3.	Neutral	74 (43.8%)

4.	Agree	56 (33.1%)

5.	Strongly Agree	19 (11.2%)

1.	Strongly	2 (1.2%) Disagree
2.	Disagree	13 (7.7%)

3.	Neutral	61 (36.1%)

4.	Agree	75 (44.4%)

5.	Strongly Agree	18 (10.7%)
 
Mean scores 3.4320










3.5562
 
Stakeholders whose opinions the organization values would prefer that the organization should only use e-recruitment








 
1.	Strongly	1 (0.6%)	3.6036 Disagree
2.	Disagree	14 (8.3%)

3.	Neutral	56 (33.1%)

4.	Agree	78 (46.2%)

5.	Strongly Agree	20 (11.8%)

169 (100%)	 
 


 
Figure 4.12 Distribution of subjective norms score.

Table 4.12 summarized the frequency analysis for items measuring subjective norms. According to the results, less than half of the participants agree or strongly agree that "Most stakeholders who are important to the organization think the organization should implement e-recruitment'; "Most stakeholders who are important to the organization would want the organization to continue using e-recruitment "Stakeholders whose opinions the organization values would prefer that the organization should only use e-recruitment': The aggregated mean value of cost-saving is 3.53, suggesting that the subjective norms are at medium level. Figure 4.12 summarized the score of the items measuring subjective norms. As can be seen from the results, the majority of the score ranged between 10 and 11, which also indicate medium level subjective norms.
Success in finding the candidate frequency analysis
Table 4.13 Success in finding the candidate frequency analysis


Question	Response	N=169 (%)	Mean scores
Overall, I am satisfied with the e-recruitment process in this Organization A	1.Strongly Disagree	2 (1.2%)	3.3964
	2.Disagree	21 (12.4%)	
	3.Neutral	71 (42%)	
	4.Agree	58 (34.3%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	17 (10.1%)	
 

I do not regret using the e-recruitment process in Organization A	1.Strongly Disagree	2 (1.2%)	3.5562
	2.Disagree	16 (9.5%)	
	3.Neutral	60 (35.5%)	
	4.Agree	68 (40.2%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	23 (13.6%)	
I am glad to use thee-recruitment process in the Organization A	1.Strongly Disagree	2 (1.2%)	3.6036
	2.Disagree	14 (8.3%)	
	3.Neutral	54 (32%)	
	4.Agree	78 (46.2%)	
	5.Strongly Agree	21 (12.4%)	

 		169 (100%)	
 


Figure 4.13 Distribution of success in finding the candidate score.

Table 4.13 summarized the frequency analysis for items measuring success in finding the candidate. According to the results, nearly half of the participants agree or strongly agree that "Overall, I am satisfied with the e-recruitment process in this Organization A "I am glad to use the e-recruitment process in the Organization A': The aggregated mean value of cost-saving is 3.52, suggesting that the subjective norms are at medium level. Figure 4.13 summarized the score of the items measuring success in finding the candidate. As can be seen from the results, the majority of the score ranged between 10 and 11, which also indicate a medium level success in finding the candidate.

Correlation analysis
Correlation between Organization A knowledge and Success in finding the candidate
n order to check the correlation between Organization A knowledge and success in finding the candidate, a scatter plot was first created in order to ensure that there was not a violation of the assumptions of normality, linearity and homoscedasticity among the data. As seen in Figure 14 below, there is a strong, positive correlation between the variables of Organization A knowledge and success in finding the candidate and the data is normally distributed.
 
 

Figure 4.14: Scatterplot of Organization A know/edge/employee success in finding the candidate relationship.

After inspecting a positive correlation between Organization A knowledge and success in finding the candidate, a Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient was carried out to analyze the relationship between Organization A knowledge and customer success in finding the candidate. The results are shown in table 4.14 above. The correlation value below 0.3 indicates ow level correlation; the correlation value between 0.3 and 0.6 indicates medium level correlation, while the correlation value above 0.6 indicates higher level correlation. As can be seen in Table 4.14, there was a medium positive correlation between Organization A knowledge and success in finding the candidate, with a correlation value of 0.373, which is significant at 0.01 evels, indicating that higher levels of Organization A knowledge is associated with higher levels of customer success in finding the candidate.
Table 4.74 Correlation between Organization A knowledge and Success in finding the candidate




Organization A Knowledge	

Pearson Correlation	Organization A Knowledge	Success in finding the candidate

0.373**
	Sig. (2-tailed)		0.000
	N	169	169
Success in finding the candidate	Pearson Correlation

Sig. (2-tailed)	0.373**

0.000	
	N	169	169

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).


The correlation between Environmental Concern and Success in finding the candidate
n order to check the correlation between Organization A knowledge and success in finding the candidate, a scatter plot was created. As seen in Figure 4.15 below, there is a strong, positive correlation between the variables of environmental concern and success in finding the candidate and the data is normally distributed.
 
 

Figure 15: Scatterplot of environmental concern/employee success in finding the candidate relationship.

After inspecting a positive correlation between environmental concern and success in finding the candidate, a Pearson product­ moment correlation coefficient was carried out to analyze the relationship between environmental concern and customer success in finding the candidate. The results are shown in table 15 below. As can be seen in Table 15, there was a medium positive correlation between environmental concern and success in finding the candidate, with a correlation value of 0.313, which is significant at 0.01 level, indicating that higher levels of environmental concern is associated with higher levels of customer success in finding the candidate.
Table 4.15 The correlation between Environmental Concern and Success in finding the candidate




Success in finding the candidate	

Pearson Correlation	Success in finding the candidate	Environmental Concern

0.413**
	Sig. (2-tailed)		0.000
	N	169	169
Environmental Concern	Pearson Correlation

Sig. (2-tailed)	0.313**

0.000	
	N	169	169

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).


The correlation between Cost-saving and Success in finding the candidate
n order to check the correlation between a fair wage and success in finding the candidate, a scatter plot was created. As seen in Figure 16 below, there is a strong, positive correlation between the variables of cost-saving and success in finding the candidate and the data are normally distributed.
 
 

Figure 4.16 Scatterplot of cost-saving/employee success in finding the candidate relationship.

After inspecting a positive correlation between a fair wage and success in finding the candidate, a Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient was carried out to analyze the relationship between cost-saving and customer success in finding the candidate. The results are shown in table 16 below. As can be seen from this table, there was a medium positive correlation between a cost-saving and success in finding the candidate, with a correlation value of 0.412, which is significant at 0.01 level, indicating that higher levels of cost-saving is associated with higher levels of customer success in finding the candidate.
Table 4.76 Correlation between Cost-saving and Success in finding the candidate




Success in finding the candidate	

Pearson Correlation	Success in finding the candidate	Cost-saving

0.412**
	Sig. (2-tailed)		0.000
	N	169	169
Cost-saving	Pearson Correlation	0.412**	
	Sig. (2-tailed)	0.000	
	N	169	169

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).


The correlation between Quality recruitment and Success in finding the candidate
n order to check the correlation between quality recruitment and success in finding the candidate, a scatter plot was created. As seen in Figure 4.17 below, there is a strong, positive correlation between the variables of quality recruitment and success in finding the candidate and the data is normally distributed.
 
 

Figure 4.17: Scatterplot of quality recruitment/employee success in finding the candidate relationship.

After inspecting a positive correlation between quality recruitment and success in finding the candidate, a Pearson product­ moment correlation coefficient was carried out to analyse the relationship between quality recruitment and customer success in finding the candidate. The results are shown in Table 4.17 below. As can be seen from this table, there was a medium positive correlation between quality recruitment and success in finding the candidate, with a correlation value of 0.409, which is significant at 0.01 level, indicating that higher levels of quality recruitment is associated with higher levels of customer success in finding the candidate.
Table 4.17 Correlation between Quality recruitment and Success in finding the candidate




Success in finding the candidate	

Pearson Correlation	Success in finding the candidate	Quality recruitment

0.419**
	Sig. (2-tailed)		0.000
	N	169	169
Quality recruitment	Pearson Correlation

Sig. (2-tailed)	0.409**

0.000	
	N	169	169

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).


Correlation between Quicker recruitment process and Success in finding the candidate
n order to check the correlation between quicker recruitment process and success in finding the candidate, a scatter plot was created. As seen in Figure 4.18 below, there is a strong, positive correlation between the variables of quicker recruitment process and success in finding the candidate and the data is normally distributed.
 
 

Figure 4.18 Scatterplot of quicker recruitment process/employee success in finding the candidate relationship.

After inspecting a positive correlation between quicker recruitment process and success in finding the candidate, a Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient was carried out to analyze the relationship between quicker recruitment process and customer success in finding the candidate. The results are shown in Table 4.18 below. As can be seen from this table, there was a medium positive correlation between quicker recruitment process and success in finding the candidate, with a correlation value of 0.455, which is significant at 0.01 level, indicating that higher levels of the quicker recruitment process is associated with higher levels of customer success in finding the candidate.
Table 78 Correlation between Quicker recruitment process and Success in finding the candidate




Success in finding the candidate	

Pearson Correlation	Success in finding the candidate	Quicker recruitment process

0.355**
	Sig. (2-tailed)		0.000
	N	169	169
Quicker recruitment process	Pearson Correlation

Sig. (2-tailed)	0.455**

0.000	
	N	169	169

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).


The correlation between Subjective norms and Success in finding the candidate
n order to check the correlation between subjective norms and success in finding the candidate, a scatter plot was created. As seen in Figure 4.19 below, there is a strong, positive correlation between the variables of subjective norms and success in finding the candidate and the data is normally distributed.
 
 

Figure 4.19 Scatterplot of subjective norms and employee success in finding the candidate relationship.

After inspecting a positive correlation between subjective norms and success in finding the candidate, a Pearson product­ moment correlation coefficient was carried out to analyse the relationship between subjective norms and customer success in finding the candidate. The results are shown in table 19 below. As can be seen from this table, there was a strong positive correlation between subjective norms and success in finding the candidate, with a correlation value of 0.765, which is significant at 0.01 level, indicating that higher levels of subjective norms is associated with higher levels of customer success in finding the candidate.
Table 4.79 Correlation between Subjective norms and Success in finding the candidate




Success in finding the candidate	

Pearson Correlation	Success in finding the candidate	Subjective Norms

0.765**
	Sig. (2-tailed)		0.000
	N	169	169
Subjective Norms	Pearson Correlation	0.765**	
	Sig. (2-tailed)	0.000	
	N	169	169
**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).


Regression analysis
Regression analysis is a statistical process for estimating the relationships among variables (Blanchard & Cathy, 2002). More specifically, regression analysis is normally used to understand how the change of independent variables can affect the change of dependent variables (Blanchard & Cathy, 2002). The correlation analysis above indicated that there are relationships between subjective norms, quicker recruitment process, Organization A knowledge, cost-saving, quality recruitment, environmental concern and success in finding the candidate. In order to find out how these variables influence customer success in finding the candidate and which one has the biggest impact, the multiple-linear regression is used.
Table 4.20 Model Summary

 
Model	R	R Square		Adjusted R Square
 
Std. Error of the	Durbin-Watson Estimate
 
dimension0	0.779a	0.538	0.536	0.19111	1.948

a.	Predictors: (Constant), Subjective Norms, Quicker recruitment process, Organization A Knowledge, Cost-saving, Quality recruitment, Environmental Concern
b.	Dependent Variable: Success in finding the candidate


The Adjusted R Square is 0.536, which means that the independent variables of subjective norms, quicker recruitment process, Organization A knowledge, cost-saving, quality recruitment, and environmental concern can explain 53.6% of the variance of success in finding the candidate.
Table 4.21ANOVA


Model		Sum of Squares	df	Mean Square	F	Sig.
	Regression	90.280	6	15.047	411.961	o.oooa
	Residual	5.917	162	0.037		
	Total	96.197	168			

a.	Predictors: (Constant), Subjective Norms, Quicker recruitment process, Organization A Knowledge, Cost-saving, Quality recruitment, Environmental Concern
b.	Dependent Variable: Success in finding the candidate


By summarizing the ANOVA table, it can be said that the independent variables of subjective norms, quicker recruitment process, Organization A knowledge, cost-saving, quality recruitment, and environmental concern can predict the dependent variable of success in finding the candidate at a significance of 0.01, by considering F=411.961.
Table 4.22 Coefficients

 
Unstandardized Coefficients
 
Standardized	Sig.	Collinearity Statistic Coefficients
 

	B	Std. Error	Beta			Tolerance	
 
(Constant)	-0.289	0.101		-2.854	0.005		
Organization A Knowledge	0.286	0.054	0.283	2.203	0.032	0.142	1.(
Environmental Concern	0.258	0.067	0.212	2.073	0.047	0.207	2.
Cost-saving	0.336	0.036	0.334	3.490	0.000	0.329	2.,
Quality recruitment	0.312	0.041	0.307	2.808	0.007	0.281	3.
Quicker recruitment	0.426	0.033	0.424	5.774	0.000	0.390	2.
process							
Subjective Norms	0.478	0.022	0.437	6.732	0.000	0.827	1.:

a.	Dependent Variable: Success in finding the candidate


The regression results are summarized in Table 4.22 above. According to the results, there is no collenearity problem among the independent variables as the VIF values for all independent variables are less than 10 and the Tolerance value for all variables are above 0.1. It is found that subjective norms, quicker recruitment process, Organization A knowledge, cost-saving, quality recruitment, and environmental concern can significantly impact success in finding the candidate, with sig values all less than
 
0.05. Specifically, subjective norms have the biggest impact on success in finding the candidate, with a standardized coefficient value of 0.437, followed by a quicker recruitment process, with a standardized coefficient value of 0.424 and cost-saving, with a value of 0.334. The environmental concern has the smallest impact on success in finding the candidate, with a standardized coefficient value of 0.212.
Conclusions and Recommendations
Introduction
This chapter presents the conclusion and the recommendations of the findings and of the results in accordance to the objectives of this study.
Conclusion and recommendations
There are a number of reasons why many organizations are gradually embracing e-recruitment process. Various researchers have carried out a research to establish the benefits of e-recruitment methods in the United Kingdom. The study focused on the HR managers and had over 25 thousand respondents. The respondents were from nearly 1000 organizations. The study established that the most significant reason for the use of e-recruiting methods is cost efficiency (80%), followed by ease of access by applicants (60%), access to a larger pool of candidates (50%), and greater success in finding the right candidates (49%). The findings show that most respondents admitted that e-recruitment was a success (65%), and only a small section thought it was unsuccessful (15%).
However, most of these studies were not clear on the definition of success. They defined success based on a solitary item and how the respondents categorized the organization's effort to obtain and execute the e-recruiting process. The responses were measured on a Likert scale. The scales also ranged from "very successful" to "very unsuccessful''. The statements used to gauge the participants' attitude towards the organization. However, some studies are not specific about the definition of success. They are hinged on the supposition that human resource is context-specific. For this reason, success is based on diverse conditions.
The study found that success is not guaranteed in all e-recruitment cases; the success of an e-recruitment system depends on the implementation process. Therefore, the efficiency of thee-recruitment process relies on the implementation process, rather than the system itself. It is believed that the success of the e-recruitment process is hinged on comprehensive planning and employment of customary HR practices. He adds that organizations can only realize success if they embrace suitable strategies during the implementation process.
Therefore, implementation can be regarded as a very significant aspect of the e-recruitment process. Even though implementation is one of the crucial components of the e-recruitment process, it has been ignored by many studies. Despite acknowledging the significance of e-recruitment implementation, there are very few results on the same. In addition, most studies focus on the applicants' point of view, instead of the organizations'. Nonetheless, studies on e-recruitment process are still limited. After more than ten years, little has changed and many people are still uninformed about e-recruitment.
This can be confirmed by findings from numerous studies. In addition, most studies emphasize on the applicant's point of view and paying less attention to the employer's perspective. Nonetheless, most of these studies acknowledge the significance of implementation in thee-recruitment process. However, studies on e-recruitment implementation are also. For this reason, the study will add to the body of knowledge relating to the implementation of the online recruitment process with our focus on Saudi Arabia. The paper will be distinguished by a number of foci. First, it will emphasize on the implementation of online recruitment itself. The second focus will be on providing more insight on e-recruitment implementation in Saudi Arabia from the government and corporate point of view.
References
 hamad, H.S. (2014). The labor market in Saudi Arabia: Foreign Workers, Unemployment, and Minimum Wage. Web.

Blanchard, K., & Cathy, T. S. (2002). The Generosity Factor: Discover the Joy of Giving Your Time, Talent, and Treasure. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Web.
Boxall, P., & Purcell, J. (2003). Strategy and Human Resource Management. Hampshire: Palgrave MacMillan. Web. Cappelli, P. (2001). Making the most of On-line recruiting. Harvard business review, 79, 139 -146. Web.
Chartered Institute of Personnel Development. (2007). Recruitment and Retention 2007, London: CIPD. Web.
 
Delone, W.H., & McLean, E.R. (2003). The Delone and McLean model of information systems success: a ten-year update. Journal of management information systems, 79 (4), 9 - 30. Web.
Fawzi, N., & Almarshed, S. (2013). HRM Context: Saudi Culture, "Wasta" and Employee Recruitment Post Positivist Methodological Approach, the Case of Saudi Arabia. Journal of Human Resource Management and Labor Studies, 7(2), 1-14. Web.
Handlogten, C. (2009)./mplementation of e-recruitment: enablers and success indicators (Master Thesis. University of Twente, Twente, Holland). Web.
Krishnan, S.K., & Singh, M. (2006). Issues and concerns in the implementation and maintenance of HRIS. Indian Institute of Management. Web.
Newton, R. (2006). Project management: Five Steps to Make a Success of Each Project. Amsterdam: Pearson Education Benelux. Web.
Panayotopoulou, L., Vakola, M., & Galanaki, E. (2005). E-HR adoption and the role of HRM: evidence from Greece. Personnel review, 36 (2), 277 - 294. Web.
Parry, E. (2006). Drivers of the adoption of online recruitment- an analysis using diffusion of innovation theory. Cranfield, Bedford: Cranfield School of Management. Web.
Parry, E., & Tyson, S. (2008). An analysis of the use and success of online recruitment methods in the UK. Human resource management journal, 78 (3), 257 -174. Web.
Pin, J. R., Laorden, M., & Saenz-Diez, I. (2001). Internet recruiting power, opportunities and effectiveness. International Research Centre on Organizations. Web.
Ruta, C. D. (2005). The application of change management theory to HR portal implementation in subsidiaries of multinational corporations. Human resource management,44 (1), 35 - 53. Web.
Saunders, M., Thornhill, A., & Lewis, P. (2009). Research Methods for Business Students. New York, NY: Prentice Hall. Web. Scott, S. (2011). Research Methodology: Sampling Techniques. Journal of Scientific Research, 2(1), 87-92. Web.
Strang, K. (2015). The Pa/grave handbook of research design in business and management. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. Web.
United Nations. (2012). E-Government Survey 2072: Leveraging e-government at a time of financial and economic crisis, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. New York: Division for Public Administration and Development Management. Web.


How Do Brand Names Affect Customer Decision-Making Process in Selecting Fast Food Restaurants in London?
Introduction
In highly competitive industries such as the fast food or quick service restaurant (QSR) industry, a strong brand name typically marks the difference between success and failure.
A strong, recognizable brand allows a QSR firm to best its competitors simply because customers have an expectation of the brand that translates into a form of emotional attachment or security, the so-called brand loyalty concept wherein consumers return to the QSR of their choice again and again to repeat a known emotional experience.
As long as the brand understands the consumer's expectation and does not deviate from it, this relationship can continue over decades or even over a lifetime. Particularly in the QSR industry, wherein very little variety exists between the products that the top QSR chains serve, brand strength typically separates the wheat from the chaff.
As a result of this marketing reality, a great deal of scholarly and commercial interest in brand equity, brand awareness, brand personality, brand loyalty and the impact of these on the consumer purchasing decision process has surfaced in recent years.
Statement of the Problem
Effective QSR brand management depends on positive brand equity (Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004). Keller (1993) characterized customer based brand equity as the proportional impact of brand knowledge on a customer's response to the brand's advertising or marketing efforts, compared to his or her response to the same product - in this case, fast food - from an unnamed or unknown producer.
The successful marketing of a QSR brand must go beyond generic consumer responses to price; rather, it must condition the consumer response emotionally and psychologically, to the end that the consumer chooses the QSR brand based on an experience that he or she wants to repeat.
To achieve this end, the brand management team must understand the complex interplay that occurs between brand awareness, brand association and consumer choice.
As Keller (1993) explains, "brand knowledge...involves both brand awareness...recall and recognition...and brand image or associations. Based on these definitions, a brand has positive...customer-based brand equity if the consumer has a favourable... reaction to the product, price, promotion or distribution of a brand, relative to the same marketing mix element of the generic product or service" (Keller, 1993, p. 5).
Conversely, a brand will encounter negative customer based brand equity if the consumer's reaction to the brand's marketing is unfavourable, or if the consumer has a negative reaction to the brand category - in this case, fast food.
However, as evidenced by the global success of the Subway chain, consumers can still have an unfavourable reaction to a brand that represents the product category without condemning the product category as a whole (Reynolds, 2011). Consumers that choose Subway over McDonald's, for example, have not rejected the entire QSR product category; they have simply found a QSR product offering that serves their needs.
The researcher's aim for the study was to observe this complex interplay between brand equity, brand awareness, product category and consumer choice using QSR customers in London as the research subjects.
The study sought to understand the factors that affect customer decision making process in London, specifically in regards to the top six QSR firms in London: McDonald's, Subway, Yum! Brands, Domino's Pizza, Eat Ltd., and Pret a Manger.
The research problem was to understand the extent to which London consumers care about the brand name of fast food firms, and understand the extent to which brand names have an effect on buyer behaviour.
 
In addition, the researcher set out to learn if the top six fast food firms attract more customers around London compared to lesser known brands or local merchants that provide the same products. The study endeavoured to determine to what extent the brand name gives QSR fast food firms a competitive advantage.
Purpose of the Study
The aim of the study was to determine the relationships between the brand names of top fast-food restaurants in London and consumer decision-making. The researcher set out to understand the relationship between brand and buyer behaviour in the London QSR market.
The qualitative research method of document analysis used in this study allowed the researcher to study a wide range of primary and secondary research in order to cement a theory around brand recognition, brand awareness, brand strategy, consumer spending, consumer decision-making, and the influence of the economic climate between 2009 and 2011 on all of these factors.

Objectives

1.	What do the fast food customers in London think of fast food restaurants, and how important is the brand name of a fast food restaurant to them?
2.	Do customers really care about brand name, or do they simply select it due to the low price?

3.	How do customers compare their regular fast food restaurant with its competitive firms?

4.	Do fast food firms gain any competitive advantage due to their brand name?

5.	Do marketing/promotion campaigns attract people from competitive brands?

Hypotheses/Research Questions

1.	What do the fast food customers in London think of fast food restaurants, and how important is a brand name to them when making food choices?
2.	Do fast food customers in London really care about the brand name of a fast food restaurant, or do they select it due to the low price?
3.	How do the fast food customers in London compare their regular restaurant with its competitive firms?

4.	Do fast food firms acquire any form of a competitive advantage due to their brand name?

5.	To what extent do marketing and promotion campaigns attract people from competitive brands?

Background of the Study
In this study, the researcher endeavoured to determine the extent to which brand strength affected buyer behaviour amongst London QSR consumers. The overall goal of the study was to discover what attitudes London QSR consumers hold in regards to the top fast food chain restaurants that they frequent. The researcher also set out to understand the role that QSR brand name plays in London consumers' food choices.
The researcher sought to understand if QSR consumers in London genuinely care about the fast food brand names, or if they simply select a certain brand's offering based on how little it costs when compared to its QSR competitors that offer the same type of food.
The researcher also endeavoured to determine how London QSR consumers view their regular restaurant compared with its competitive firms; again, if such a comparison does indeed take place, the researcher sought to find out if the comparison is based solely on cost, or some other emotional or psychological factor.
Finally, the researcher set out to determine if QSR firms gain any competitive edge based on the power of their brand name and associated brand loyalty, and to gauge the success or failure of marketing and promotional strategies and campaigns designed to attract brand loyal consumers to competitor QSR brands.
For the purpose of the study, the researcher chose to focus on the top six fast food restaurant chains currently operating in London: these include Subway, McDonald's, Domino's Pizza, Yum! Brands - which include KFC, Taco Bell, and Pizza Hut - Eat Ltd., and Pret a Manger (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010; Euromonitor International, 2010; IBIS World, 2011).
 
Definition of Terms
Quick service restaurant (QSR)
QSRs or quick service restaurants refer to fast food restaurants or chains that serve food typically in 10 minutes or under. Quick service restaurants do not offer table service and typically do not serve alcoholic beverages.
Brand
The term brand refers to a product that differentiates itself from its competitors in the same product category through the use of a distinctive visual symbol, logo, sign, name or design that consumers associate with the company that produces the product (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Kapferer, 2008; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).

Brand management
Brand management refers to the strategic marketing and advertising efforts made by the company to increase market share via the success of the brand.
Brand managers employ various marketing and advertising strategies such as celebrity endorsement or product placement to advance their brands ahead of its closest competitors (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Heding et al., 2009; Kapferer, 2008; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).

Brand equity
Brand equity encompasses both a financial definition and a consumer perception definition (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Heding et al., 2009; Kapferer, 2008; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).
The financial understanding of brand equity refers to the actual value of the brand in tangible, demonstrable financial terms such as sales figures and earnings portfolio boosts (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Heding et al., 2009; Kapferer, 2008; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).
The consumer definition of brand refers to the relationship that develops between the consumer and the brand (Kapferer, 1997). The most obvious means to demonstrate brand equity occurs in the consumer's perception that the brand functions more successfully than its competitors (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Heding et al., 2009; Kapferer, 2008; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002)

Brand loyalty
Brand loyalty refers to the behaviour of a brand's core consumers who will champion the brand above all others. These consumers often function as free marketing tools for the company (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Heding et al., 2009; Kapferer, 2008; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).
Tremendous brand loyalty gains have been made across all markets through digital marketing brand loyalty programs and social networking relationships that companies develop with their core customer base via "viral branding" (Holt, 2004, p. 28).

Brand awareness
Brand awareness refers to the consumer's basic knowledge and memory of a particular brand in a particular product category (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Heding et al., 2009; Kapferer, 2008; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).
An example in the QSR category would be consumer awareness of burger chains in the product category of burger producers, such as McDonald's, Burger King, and Wendy's.
Brand personality
Consumers often imbue certain human qualities to the most successful and pervasive brands such as edginess or innovation (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Heding et al., 2009; Kapferer, 2008; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).
An example of brand personality in the QSR category would be Jared Fogle of Subway, an individual that personifies Subway's goals of attracting health-conscious consumers.
Brand engagement
 
Brand engagement refers to the relationship that develops between a brand and its core consumers, to the extent that the consumers consistently choose the brand over its competitors and do not accept substitutes (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Heding et al., 2009; Kapferer, 2008; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).
An example of brand engagement in the QSR sector would be a consumer who will not accept a Whopper in lieu of a Big Mac.

Customer value proposition
A customer value proposition refers to a particular strategy that a company employs in order to provide a complete customer experience to its consumers.
The customer value proposition essentially forms the bedrock of brand management, as the customer value proposition is a company's declaration that explains why a consumer should buy one product or choose one service over those offered by competitors in the same product or service category.
As Kaplan and Norton (2004) note, the strategy deployed in the customer value proposition "is based on a differentiated customer value proposition. Satisfying customers is the source of sustainable value creation" (p. 203).
The customer value proposition ultimately describes the worth of the experience that a company offers its customers through the products and services that it provides (Lee, 2011). This value creation offering underpins many elements of brand management, particularly brand engagement and brand loyalty (Kaplan and Norton, 2004; Lee 2011).

Customer behaviour
Customer behaviour is best described by the concept of benefit segmentation, which explains why people buy products according to the apparent or stated relationship between a product and the fulfilment of the customer's needs (McDonald and Dunbar, 2004).
Customers may choose products according to a variety of different features, including price, availability, or for the fulfilment of emotional needs such as status and self image (McDonald and Dunbar, 2004).
Customer decision making process
The customer decision making process functions as an adjunct to customer behaviour. The decision making process begins with the recognition of a need, be it functional, psychological or emotional (Pradhan, 2009; Tybout and Calkins, 2005).
The customer then progresses to the information stage, wherein the customer informs herself about the product and its availability (Pradhan, 2009; Tybout and Calkins, 2005).
The next stage entails evaluation, wherein the customer assesses the options available to him, based on his research. The final stage is the purchase decision stage, which can be influenced by multiple factors including the customer service experience (Pradhan, 2009; Tybout and Calkins, 2005).

Customer perception
Customer perception is best understood as an adjunct to customer satisfaction, and it is intimately tied to the customer decision making process (Tybout and Calkins, 2005).
Customer perception is commonly understood as the interplay between both the customer's perception of a product's performance and the extent to which the product meets the emotional and psychological expectations that the customer accrued prior to the acquisition of the product (Tybout and Calkins, 2005).

Summary
Chapter I introduces the research study and provides some introduction into the study of brands and brand management. Chapter I also includes a description of the statement of the problem for the research, the research questions, the purpose of the study, and a listing of the terms used in the study and their corresponding definitions. This chapter also contains a description of the background of the study.
Literature Review
The value of brand equity as an influencing factor in customer purchase decision making cannot be overstated.
 
In the fast food industry, a number of global fast food brands that are headquartered in the Western democracies build an integrated marketing strategy with a global focus; these powerhouse brands leverage the strength of their brand name around the world to benefit from large groups of consumers that they do not have to spend additional marketing dollars to win over.
The significant cost savings that strong brand equity creates, in addition to the free advertising and marketing activities that global brands receive from their brand ambassadors all over the world, make brand loyalty a viable tool for fast food firms that seek to gain a competitive advantage in the fast food product category.
In order to produce a loyal global following of brand engaged consumers, fast food firms need to glean insight into the complex emotional and psychological relationships that exist between consumers and brands.
Market researchers need to understand fundamentally the inner working of global consumer behaviour; it is necessary for fast food firms to investigate and appreciate the buying behaviour and purchase decision process of consumers as a function of brand equity.
A clear understanding of consumer attitudes toward global fast food brands and consumer perception of global fast food brands becomes paramount as a means to translate brand equity into cost savings and increases in revenue.
The researcher anticipates that the results of this research will add insight to the current body of literature in the areas of brand awareness, brand equity, brand engagement, brand attachment, and the impact of these factors on the fast food consumer's purchasing decision process.
The following study set out to determine the extent to which brand strength affected buyer behaviour amongst London QSR consumers. The researcher's goal was to discover what London QSR consumers truly think about fast food restaurants, and to learn how important the fast food brand name is to them when they make their food choices.
The researcher sought to understand if QSR consumers in London genuinely care about the fast food brand names, or if they simply select a certain brand's offering on the basis of its low cost compared to its QSR competitors.
The researcher also undertook to determine the nature of the comparison that occurs between a London QSR consumer's restaurant of choice with its competitive firms, if such a comparison does indeed take place.
The researcher looked for information to indicate whether or not the comparison is again based solely on cost, or if there something deeper, an emotional commitment that a consumer makes to a certain brand over another. For example, does a QSR consumer only defect to a competitor QSR brand when his or her brand of choice fails his or her expectations somehow?
Finally, the researcher set out to understand if QSR firms gain competitive advantage on account of the power of their brand name and associated brand loyalty, and to gauge the success of marketing and promotional strategies and campaigns designed to draw brand loyal consumers to their brand's main competitors.
For the purpose of the study, the researcher chose to focus on the top six fast food restaurant chains currently operating in London: these include Subway, McDonald's, Domino's Pizza, Yum! Brands, Eat Ltd., and Pret a Manger.
Yum! Brands operates a number of individual QSR brands including Pizza Hut, KFC, and Taco Bell. Subway, McDonald's, Domino's Pizza and Yum! Brands are all American companies. Eat Ltd. and Pret a Manger are both companies founded by U.K. citizens: Eat Ltd. remains privately owned, while Pret a Manger was recently sold to a U.K. private equity firm in partnership with Goldman Sachs (The Telegraph, 2008).
Keller (1993) defined customer based brand equity as the "differential effect of brand knowledge on consumer response to the marketing of the brand" (p. 2).
In Keller's (1993) model, "customer based brand equity involves consumers' reactions to an element of the marketing mix for the brand in comparison with their reactions to the same marketing mix element attributed to a fictitiously named or unnamed version of the product or service.
Customer based brand equity occurs when the consumer is familiar with the brand and holds some favourable, strong, and unique brand associations in memory" (p. 2).
In his seminal work Conceptualizing, Measuring, and Managing Customer Based Brand Equity, Keller (1993) examined the idea of customer-based brand equity from the perspective of the individual consumer, and outlined several ways in which the creation and maintenance of brand equity could be administered, measured, and strategically applied to marketing campaigns
 
and advertising materials.

The existence of powerful positive emotional associations that remain exclusive to the brand and denote authority over all other brands who produce and sell the same product or service remains crucial to the success of a brand in the extremely crowded QSR industry.
An example is the individual consumer's favouring of the Big Mac over the Whopper; both are burgers, yet the McDonald's consumer will choose the Big Mac due to the positive associations he or she has built up over time with the McDonald's brand in his or her memory, while the Burger King consumer while choose the Whopper for the same reasons (Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002; Simovic, 2010).
Brand personality remains an extremely important leveraging strategy for the brand management of fast food chains in the tight QSR market (Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).
Brands must create a psychological distance in the minds of consumers to distinguish themselves from their competitors. As Parsa and Kwansa (2002) explain, QSR brands must "develop a brand personality to successfully differentiate their restaurants from their competitors and to maintain the trust and loyalty of their patrons" (p. 212).
Brand personality is the "set of human traits that consumers attribute to a brand" (Parsa and Kwansa, 2002, p. 212). Dominant QSR brands share the common characteristic of a recognizable brand personality. They successfully distinguish themselves from their competitors through their "robustness, desirability, distinctiveness, and consistency" (Parsa and Kwansa, 2002, p. 212).
Brand personality refers to the consistency of the brand across cultures and across time zones; the most successful QSR brands featured in this study are multinational brands that operate in many different countries yet maintain consistency of employee uniform, store decor, and product offerings in all of their stores.
In earlier times when the market was less crowded, the strategies that restaurant brand managers developed in order to build their brand's personality focused on differentiation between various newly created products and services (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).
Brand management focused on convincing consumers of the "corresponding functional or utilitarian benefits those products or services" offered (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999, p. 48).
Within the last two decades however, as competition raged and the number of competing firms continued to multiply, the ability of brand managers to "differentiate brands on the basis of functional attributes alone" has ultimately proved ineffective against the constant and unmitigated competition in the QSR industry.
Therefore, as competition intensified, brand managers have changed their tactics to employ "symbolic meanings increasingly [to] form a basis for [the] brand's positioning and differentiation" (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999, p. 48).
Increasingly, the brand managers and marketing professionals behind the major QSR brands invest their energy and budgets into the creation and development of "meaningful and distinctive brand personalities in the minds of consumers" (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999, p. 48; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).
In order to distinguish a brand from its competitors effectively, the brand must develop a personality that is "distinctive, robust, desirable, and constant" (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999, p. 49).
For many years, QSR industry players grappled with "inconsistent, meaningless, or undesirable brand perceptions" (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999, p. 49). An example is the QSR industry's struggle with price wars (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).
When the QSR industry expected consumers to pay attention exclusively to the cost of the fast food products, the result was a heated and interminable price war between the major brands that "sapped customer loyalty and diminished revenues" (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999, p. 49).
The solution to the ineffectiveness of price wars for the main QSR chains such as McDonalds was to focus instead on the development of a solid and appealing brand personality that sticks in the minds of consumers, and builds and maintains brand loyalty over time (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).
 
Brand personality can sometimes take the form of a particular spokesperson such as Subway's Jared Fogle, or even a particular image, such as the McDonalds golden arches. In essence, the brand personality provides a comforting sameness of product offering to consumers that distinguish it from its competitors. This offering for the most part remains emotional and has little or nothing to do with cost.
More recently, Kapferer (2008) wrote of the critical rift that has developed between marketing scholars as to a unified definition of a brand, and the most effective means of measuring the brand's strength. Kapferer (2008) explains that in regards to brand equity, "there is a major schism between two paradigms.
One is customer based and focuses exclusively on the relationship customers have with the brand...from total indifference to attachment, loyalty, and willingness to buy and rebuy based on beliefs of superiority and evoked emotions. The other aims at producing measures in dollars, euros, or yen" (p. 9).
As the consumer's attention span continues to fragment, Kapferer (2008) asserts, the most successful brands are those that "convey certitude [and] trust" (p. 11).
The economy, in Kapferer's (2008) words, has become "an attention economy. [There] is so much choice and opacity that consumers cannot spend their time comparing before they make a choice.
They have no time and even if they did, they cannot be certain of being able to determine the right product or service for them" (p. 11). In this economy where consumer attention becomes premium, successful brands provide a service for the time-starved consumer (Kapferer, 2008).
Successful brands function as a "time and risk reducer" (Kapferer, 2008, p. 11). In the QSR industry, the brands that encourage consumers to buy over and over again are those that save time and remove all chance and risk from the food purchasing activity.
In essence, QSR brands that provide the service of reassuring the consumer that they will receive exactly what they expect to receive appear to be those that sustain the highest yield of repeat buyers and fully engaged loyal brand champions.
Brand engagement or brand attachment refers to a phenomenon that some of the older, more well established fast food brands such as McDonalds's enjoy with their core customer base (Holt, 2004; Kapferer, 2008; Keller, 1993). Brand engagement is a process that begins with brand awareness and depends wholly upon the consumer's "proximity to the brand" (Kapferer, 2008, p. 72).
Essentially, as Kapferer (2008) notes, the QSR consumer will develop a relationship with the brand of his or her choice based on proximity, which then "moves from a feeling of presence...awareness, recognition...to a feeling of relevance [or] it's for me, to the perception of performance and a clear advantage, and ultimately to a genuine affective attachment" (p. 72).
This relationship is emotional and long term and again, often has little to do with price, although low price in some cases may serve as the entry point for brand awareness.
As Kapferer (2008) notes, brand engagement refers to a phenomenon far more complex and penetrating than simply a "repeat purchase" (p. 72). Rather, brand engagement speaks to the consumer's long term, "personal involvement with the brand" (Kapferer, 2008, p. 73).
A brand that has succeeded in achieving engagement with its customers affects their buying behaviour in the product category (Holt, 2004; Kapferer, 2008; Keller, 1993). As Kapferer (2008) explains, in full brand engagement, "if the brand were not there, the client would prefer to wait than buy an alternative. For the consumer, there is no substitutability" (p. 73).
In the QSR landscape, an example of full brand engagement might be if a McDonald's customer seeking a burger encounters a Burger King, he or she will not purchase a burger there, regardless of hunger level or time constraints, but will keep walking until a McDonald's appears.
Two elements must exist in order to sustain this type of brand engagement with the consumer: the first element is attachment, quantified by a powerful awareness of the brand, wherein the customer feels "closeness with the brand" (Kapferer, 2008, p. 73).
The second element refers to customer satisfaction, namely, a firmly held belief on the part of the customer that the brand consistently performs better than its competitors (Keller, 1993; Kapferer, 2008; Kim and Kim, 2004)
 
QSR firms belong to the particular product category of fast foods, and in some cases, the product category has become negatively linked to the brand, and vice versa.
This study revealed two areas in which the brand and product category had merged negatively in the minds of consumers: the area of rising obesity rates, especially amongst children and young adults, and in the area of cultural aversion, since four of the six top QSR chains in London are owned by Americans.
Keller (1993) outlined that in the cases of very strong or very old brands such as McDonald's, "some product category associations may become linked to the brand, either in terms of specific beliefs or overall attitudes" (p. 6). Consumer attitudes in regards to a particular product category typically function as a vital indicator of customer response and consumer reaction (Keller, 1993).
In the QSR category, most fast food chains share the negative product category association in the area of child obesity rates. The exception would be Subway, which has successfully branded itself as a healthful alternative to fast food, while still preserving its quick service restaurant categorization.
The current research study reviewed the work of a number of researchers who have studied brand awareness, brand equity, brand engagement and consumer behaviour and the consumer purchasing decision process as it applies in the QSR industry.
Kim and Kim (2004) conducted a study that revealed the essential dimensions that underpin brand equity and investigated the impact they had on the performance of several chain outfits in the QSR category.
Kim and Kim (2004) analyzed the data gathered from a survey of 394 shoppers in Korea; the researchers asked the shoppers to complete a questionnaire that gauged the consumers' brand equity. Kim and Kim (2004) discovered in this study that "brand awareness, perceived quality, brand loyalty, and brand image are important dimensions of customer-based brand equity.
Brand awareness appeared to be the dimension that gave the greatest boost to QSR firms' performance, even though brand awareness had relatively less importance in the brand-equity construct itself" (p. 116). Kim and Kim (2004) found that brand loyalty, which represented a substantial aspect of the "construct of brand equity in QSR chains, did not exhibit a significant relationship with firms' performance" (p. 116).
Kim and Kim (2004) discovered that brand equity has a constructive impact on a firm's performance; according to their research, more than half of the variations in performance can be accredited to brand equity for QSR chain restaurants.
To determine the connection between brand equity and consumers sales in QSR chains, Kim and Kim (2004) used a simple bivariate regression model and regressed brand equity on sales; these figures showed that brand equity accounts for over half of the sales variation.
"When brand equity components such as brand loyalty, brand awareness, perceived quality and brand image were regressed on sales in a multiple regression, these components explained over 70 percent of the variations in sales" (Kim and Kim, 2004, p.
117). According to this study therefore, "strong brand equity is significantly correlated with revenues for quick-service restaurants" (Kim and Kim, 2004, p. 116).
Ramasamy and Yeung (2008) utilized a panel data structure for their study that examined the top 50 firms in the United States between 2000 and 2005 to determine the "nexus between brand value and various measures of firm performance" (p. 322). The researchers were successful in validating a connection between the measure of brand equity or brand value and "multiple profitability ratios and stock market performance measures.
The contemporaneous relationships between brand values and profitability are significant even after controlling for unobserved effects through panel data estimation techniques" (Ramasamy and Yeung, 2008, p. 322).
The study results indicated that firms with entrenched, robust brands remain "more profitable, and the significance of brands' effects on internal profitability is very consistent regardless of the selection of measures and thus could not have occurred by chance" (Ramasamy and Yeung, 2008, p. 322).
This study also indicated that brands with strong brand equity tend to enjoy consistently higher performance in the stock market (Ramasamy and Yeung, 2008).
Schmitt and Zarantonello (2010) demonstrated that brand experience varies amongst different groups of consumers.
 
The researchers surveyed 1134 respondents in 10 Italian cities between October of 2007 and 2008 using a questionnaire that highlighted a particular brand and asked the consumers surveyed to rate that brand according to their experience of it. The researchers then used cluster and regression analysis to investigate the relationships between brand experience and purchase intention among the respondents.
The researchers discovered that among consumers, different "experiential appeals" exist, depending on the consumer's brand preference and level of brand engagement. As Schmitt and Zarantonello, (2010) explain, "on one extreme, there are holistic consumers, who seem to be interested in all aspects of experience; on the other extreme, there are utilitarian consumers, who do not attach much importance to brand experience" (p. 532).
In the middle, there exist what the researchers call "hybrid consumers" (Schmitt and Zarantonello, 2010, p. 532). As Schmitt and Zarantonello, (2010) note, these consumers remain engaged with specific brands in specific ways, namely, "hedonistic consumers...attach importance to sensorial gratification and emotions, [while] action-oriented consumers...focus on actions and behaviours" (p. 532).
Also, customers whom the researchers label as "inner-directed consumers" are more interested in creating an internal experience of the brand such as "sensations, emotions, and thoughts" (Schmitt and Zarantonello, 2010, p. 532). Brand equity and brand engagement, according to Schmitt and Zarantonello (2010), will occur in varying degrees according to the orientation of the consumer.
De Pelsmacker and Dens (2010) conducted a study to investigate the relationship between branding strategies for the launch of a new brand and the launch of a "line extension" of products from a well-established brand (p. 50).
The researchers studied "advertising execution strategies...informational, positive emotional and negative emotional...and product category involvement...low and high...on consumers' attitudes towards the product, purchase intention and the parent brand" (De Pelsmacker and Dens, 2010, p. 58).
Results indicated that the extension of a new product from an existing brand fares much better than a new brand in terms of purchase intention and positive brand attitudes.
De Pelsmacker and Dens (2010) also found that "advertising strategy has little impact on consumer responses to line extensions of familiar brands ...For well-known, high-quality brands, the negative evaluations of negative emotional appeals are not reflected in product and brand evaluations.
[Thus], it is apparent that brand extensions are more positively evaluated than new brands. As such, launching new products as extensions of established brands seems a viable strategy over new brands" (De Pelsmacker and Dens, 2010, p. 59).
Bentley, Kavanagh and Thornton (2009) conducted research into the customer purchasing decision process as it pertains to the fast food product category. In this study, the researchers set out to determine the relationship between the availability of fast food and the consumption of fast food in key market areas (Bentley, Kavanagh and Thornton, 2009).
The principal goal of this study was to demonstrate a causal link between the increased consumer purchasing of fast food and the proliferation of fast food chains and restaurants in target market areas (Bentley, Kavanagh and Thornton, 2009).
The study took place in Melbourne, Australia and included a sample of 2564 households; the research reflected a 64 percent response rate to a food purchasing survey that the researchers mailed to a random sample (Bentley, Kavanagh and Thornton, 2009).
The study focused exclusively on lower income households in Melbourne and its surrounding suburbs, specifically those with an income of 400 dollars or less per week before taxes (Bentley, Kavanagh and Thornton, 2009).
The fast food chains featured in this study include McDonald's, Red Rooster, Kentucky Fried Chicken, Hungry Jacks, and Pizza Hut; Red Rooster and Hungry Jacks are Australian fast food restaurant chains.
The researchers further parsed the sample into a number of categories based on age, education, country of origin, profession, gender, and the composition of the households represented in the study, including "single male adult without children, single female adult without children, a single adult with a child or children, two or more adults without children, or two or more adults with a child or children" (Bentley, Kavanagh and Thornton, 2009, p. 31).
 
The results of this research uncovered "an independent association between the variety of fast food restaurants and fast food purchasing; an increase of one different fast food chain within the 3 kilometre network areas increased the odds of monthly fast food purchasing by 13 percent" (Bentley, Kavanagh and Thornton, 2009, p. 34).
However, the researchers cautioned that this remained the sole statistically significant finding of the study in models that has been adjusted (Bentley, Kavanagh and Thornton, 2009). As Bentley, Kavanagh and Thornton (2009) explain:
No significant relationships were found between density and proximity after the inclusion of individual socio-economic predictors suggesting these were important confounders.
[However] it is important to note that although we only had one significant finding in models adjusted for all confounders the relationships were all in the same direction; they were all suggestive of a possible relationship between greater access and increased purchasing (p. 34).
While this study demonstrated a link between availability of fast food and increased customer purchasing of fast food, the study largely sought to discover the relationship between socio-economic factors and fast food consumption (Bentley, Kavanagh and Thornton, 2009).
As such, the study authors caution that "a potential for bias...potentially exists within research related to dietary behaviours and neighbourhood health effects" (Bentley, Kavanagh and Thornton, 2009, p. 35).
Therefore, the study authors "recommend that future research carefully disentangle the relationships using DAGs, particularly in relation to assessing the potential mediating role of fast food store access for socio-economic associations and intake" (Bentley, Kavanagh and Thornton, 2009, p. 35).

New Products and Product Innovation
Gammoh, Skiver and Voss (2011) conducted a study to investigate the impact of brand equity on consumer choices, specifically in the area of new products. The research sought to understand how brand equity affects a customer's evaluation of "continuous [versus] discontinuous innovation of new products" (p. 65).
The researchers also endeavoured to understand and the regulating impact of brand equity on a consumer's knowledge of a particular product category.
In the QSR industry, product innovation remains tends not to represent as much of a driver for revenue and sustained business compared to industries such as the technology industry; however, as the researchers note, product innovation is "critical to companies' success," particularly in the area of product originality and perceived consumer value (Gammoh, Skiver and Voss, 2011, p. 65).
This study found that previous research had ostensibly overlooked the vital role that brand equity plays in both the consumer response to a new product as well as consumer evaluation of a new product or innovation (Gammoh, Skiver and Voss, 2011).
As Gammoh, Skiver and Voss (2011) explain, "an implicit assumption in previous research is that the brand itself does not affect on the consumer's response to the innovation type of the new product introduction.
However...comparisons between continuous and discontinuous innovation fail to account for specific effects due to different levels of brand equity of the new product.
Brands vary in their levels of brand equity, and thus may realize differential responses to continuous or discontinuous new products" (p. 65). In other words, a powerful brand may be assured of a more favourable consumer response to whatever new products it creates and markets simply by virtue of its robust brand equity.
In this study, the researchers sought to demonstrate that the fundamental value of the brand in brand equity terms will have a direct impact on a consumer's assessment of a given product innovation when it is introduced to the market. Using a 2x2 between-subjects research design, the researchers employed a consumer scenario as the stimulus for the study using a sample of 29 participants (Gammoh, Skiver and Voss, 2011).
The researchers included a product description which established the name of the firm and the brand name, as well as a brief overview of the level of innovation that the new product reflected.
 
The researchers found a direct correlation between brand recognition and the sample's response to the product innovations; the most well known brand consistently received the highest ratings in brand recall, brand familiarity and consumer attitudes (Gammoh, Skiver and Voss, 2011).
The results of this study underscored the "positive influence of well-known and high-equity brands on consumer evaluations of new product introductions, regardless of the innovation type" (Gammoh, Skiver and Voss, 2011, p. 75).
Gammoh, Skiver and Voss (2011) concluded that "high brand equity provides consumers with more information about the broad array of the benefits of the brand and thus reduces their perceived uncertainty about the potential benefits and risks associated" with a new product or innovation (Gammoh, Skiver and Voss, 2011, p. 76).
The strength of the brand itself and the equity that it has developed with consumers provides the warm introduction for whatever new products or innovations the company produces.
This study provides key insight into brand management in the realm of product innovation, as high-equity brands enjoy less risk, "since consumers are just as likely to positively evaluate those products," based on their pre-existing positive engagement with the brand (Gammoh, Skiver and Voss, 2011, p. 76).

Customer Value Proposition
Lee (2011) conducted a study of Chick-fil-A, a QSR located in the United States, in order to determine the principal factors involved in QSR operational superiority from a brand standpoint. This study focused exclusively on the customer value proposition as a means to understand the relationship between consumers and a fast food particular brand to which they provide consistent loyalty.
Lee's (2011) hypothesis for the study involved the service profit chain model, and the researcher set out to investigate the customer value proposition with the following assumptions in place: "customer loyalty drives profitability and growth, customer satisfaction drives customer loyalty, service value drives customer satisfaction, employee retention and productivity drives service value, employee satisfaction drives retention and productivity, and internal quality drives employee satisfaction" (Lee, 2011, p. 118).
According to Lee (2011), the "service-profit chain model, a firm's operating strategy, and [a firm's) service delivery system could offer better service value to customers and service value drives better customer loyalty and...financial performance" (p. 117).
In this study Lee (2011) identified several of the principal elements necessary for success in the QSR industry, specifically in regards to building and maintaining brand equity through customer loyalty. The profitability of a QSR firm and the continuous growth of its income returns are motivated predominantly by customer loyalty; customer loyalty, in turn, remain a direct consequence of consumer satisfaction (Lee, 2011).
The satisfaction of the QSR consumer is primarily influenced by the value of the product or service according to the consumer's perception (Lee, 2011). In the QSR industry, Lee (2011) notes, customer satisfaction remains crucial as a means to drive revenue and maintain market share.
The main drivers of success in customer satisfaction oriented industries such as the QSR industry include quality, speed and customer service (Lee, 2011).
Lee (2011) further delineates herein: "quality refers to the overall quality of the food at your chain, the quality at a particular restaurant, the overall quality of the brand, and the quality of the brand at a particular restaurant" (p. 117).
Of these three factors, Lee (2011) argues that speed is the most relevant in terms of building and maintaining brand equity and driving sales. "In the Quick-Service Industry, speed is imperative; for the average Quick-Service Restaurant, nearly 55%-75% of their sales are accounted for through drive-thru" (Lee, 2011, p. 118).
This study concluded that in the quick service restaurant industry, a QSR builds its customer satisfaction - and in turn its brand equity - largely via the experience that the firm's employees have with the company.
Lee (2011) argued that a high quality of employee experience correlates directly with the consumer's experience of the brand; in essence, the employee becomes engaged with the brand and functions as its most reliable and effective ambassador.
 
A successful relationship between the employee and the brand has translated into significant success for such brands as Starbucks (Lee, 2011). Similar research has shown the same results with non-fast food companies such as Southwest Airlines, Harley-Davidson, and Enterprise Rent-a-Car (Lee, 2011).
As Lee (2011), the customer value proposition and the employee value proposition are essentially mutually enhancing, as the "customer value proposition is to deliver an excellent experience to customers in quality, speed, and customer/employee service... high quality, fast delivery, healthy food, and excellent customer service help to sustain a high level of customer satisfaction" (p. 119).

Promotions and Strategies
Researchers Leone and Raggio (2009) and Seddon et al. (2010) presented studies to indicate that the QSR category benefitted slightly from the recession.
Consumer traffic increased slightly at some QSR chains, and "steady traffic at fast food outlets came at the expense of full­ service, mid-tier casual dining establishments. Consumers were attracted to the fast food restaurants because of their lower prices. Brand value for the category grew by just 1 percent" (Seddon et al., 2010, p. 74).
As Leone and Raggio (2009) explain, "it is important to highlight how short-term actions can impact long-term brand value.

If we consider a brand to represent a promise of benefits and brand equity to be the perception that a brand meets an important promise of benefits, then it is clear that what is happening during recessionary times is that consumers are more likely to consider whether or not value is part of the brand's promise" (Leone and Raggio, 2009, p. 86).
The migration from casual dining establishments to QSR chains reflected consumer response to reduced discretionary income, which will change now that the recession is subsiding, thus these new customers may only be temporary.

Subway's $5 Footlong
Subway's $5 Footlong product proved to be a huge hit in 2010. Seddon et al., (2008) found that during the lean times of the recession, the $5 Footlong represented a "compelling value proposition [that] boosted Subway's sales" (p. 74).
The successful $5 Footlong promotion, "along with the brand's commitment to freshness, enabled Subway to surpass Wendy's and Burger King in market share last year" (Seddon et al., 2009; Seddon et al., 2010).
Subway's success during the recession positioned it to compete with McDonald's. As Seddon et al., (2010) explain, "with 32,000 restaurants in 92 countries, Subway is about to overtake McDonald's in number of locations" (p. 74). Subway's brand value increased 9 percent since 2008. (O'Leary, 2010; Seddon et al., 2008; Seddon et al., 2009; Seddon et al., 2010)

McDonald's McCafe
Multibranding offers firms the opportunity to leverage existing sales units that tend to produce lower sales volumes than the core brand (Enz, 2005; Oches, 2011). Researchers Frazer et al. (2007) studied the McCafe co-branding strategy that McDonald employed in Australia to determine the success of this tactic "in franchising as a strategy to stimulate and rejuvenate growth in a mature franchising sector" (p. 442).
The researchers posited that development movements such as "multiple unit franchising mobile franchising and co-branding occur because of the sector's need to find new means of expansion beyond the standard model of franchising" (Frazer et al., 2007, p. 442).
McDonald's in Australia had experienced decreasing market share in its Australian operations in the early part of the 21st century due to consumer concerns with health, obesity, and the impact of the fat and salt content of the standard McDonald's menu on heart disease.
The researchers examined the McDonald's and McCafe co-branding strategy that the company undertook at that time to invigorate its brand in Australia and attract a new target market of consumers.
The McCafe co-brand strategy which evolved in Australia, was investigated in order to find out what "incentives and inhibitions associated with this successful co-branding initiative" existed (Frazer et al., 2007, p. 442).
 
McDonald's Australia introduced the McCafe co-branding strategy in 1999; the company adopted the sub-brand as a mainstream program for the McDonald's brand in 2001, when the "New Tastes Menu was introduced throughout Australia" (Frazer et al., 2007, p. 442).
The original purpose of the McCafe co-brand initiative was to infuse life into the flagging the McDonald's brand equity at that time. The researchers found that the co-branding strategy worked in the case of McDonald's because the brand was mature and robust enough to sustain and grow a sub-brand.
In the case of Australia, target audiences began to revisit McDonald's on account of the McCafe strategy; effectively rejuvenating the brand in a market where it has fatigued slightly due to concerns over obesity and heart disease (Frazer, L. et al., 2007).
The study demonstrated that McDonald's was able to move from a stand-alone brand to the position of "master brand, [effectively] parenting its own brand equity and that of McCafe" (p. 443).
DiPietro (2005) conducted a study of Yum! Brands' campaign to increase sales through multibranding. The company placed two or more of its brands KFC, Taco Bell and Pizza Hut in the same commercial building in a co-branding strategy to boost sales.
DiPietro (2005) pointed to "same-unit sales for 2003 have not grown over 2002, showing that cobranding may be holding sales steady during fluctuating times for quick-service restaurants, but it is not growing the sales of the restaurant units over time" (p. 96).
Cobranding and multibranding often appear as a feasible sales strategy for firms with multiple QSR assets; however, DiPietro (2005) found that the research "indicates that restaurant cobranding raises potential problems in three areas. First, cobranding may cannibalize both sales and image of one brand with the addition of another brand in the same restaurant space.
Second, cobranding may cause operational confusion, because managers and employees will have to learn two different operating systems. Third, cobranding may increase costs because of the need to train employees in two systems. As an additional point, cobranding may also confuse consumers with regard to what a restaurant is offering" (p. 96).
Product positioning in the QSR industry represents an additional competitive strategy that many of the top fast food chains in London, and in most urban areas for that matter, tend to uniformly employ.
Location remains a key element of branding strategies of the main QSR firms surveyed in this paper, particularly the powerhouse burger brands McDonald's and Burger King, which tend to compete directly in close proximity with each other for QSR customers.
In major urban areas such as London for example, McDonald's and Burger King will typically be found on the same strip or block; the same is true of food courts in malls and other many other major QSR locations such as bus terminals, airports and train stations.
Thomadsen (2007) conducted a study in order to examine the phenomenon of consumer choice and product positioning and location between competitors in the fast food industry.
For the purposes of this study, Thomadsen (2007) deemed the competition to be asymmetric given that McDonald's holds a much higher market share than Burger King. The study focused on the two burger giants McDonald's and Burger King and investigated "optimal product positioning strategies...in the context of retail outlet locations in the fast food industry" (p. 792).
Thomadsen's (2007) study examined the relationship between the two firms' revenues and product differentiation, within the context of the product homogeneity prevalent in the QSR industry. As Thomadsen's (2007) notes, both McDonald's and Burger King provide "products that are very homogeneous within each chain.
This product homogeneity - which is observed not just in the food, but also in the menu boards, uniforms, and architectural style
- is a large component of the value that comes from being a member of a chain, and both McDonald's and Burger King's success can be largely attributed to the vigilance with which their founders enforced this homogeneity" (p. 793).
This statement also explains the strength of both firm's brand equity, namely, the lack of deviation from the core consumer experience that each firm offers.
The study showed that both McDonald's and Burger King were more successful when they avoided direct competition in close physical proximity, provided that the firms operated in a large urban market such as London.
 
The prices for the products offered by both McDonald's and Burger King were the lowest when the two chains operated within close proximity, and increased as the distance between the stores increased, "approximately leveling off once the outlets are about 2-2.5 miles apart" (Thomadsen, 2007, p. 797).
However, as Thomadsen (2007) notes, "in small market areas, McDonald's would prefer to be located together with Burger King rather than have the two outlets be only a slight distance apart. In contrast, Burger King's profits always increase with greater differentiation" (Thomadson, 2007, p. 792).
Thomadsen's (2007) study also discovered that proximity tended to hurt the smaller QSR firm. As Thomadsen (2007) explains, "when Burger King and McDonald's are located together, Burger King, as the weaker firm, is unable to attract many consumers from McDonald's by lowering its prices" (p. 798).
Despite this, nine times out of ten, Burger King and McDonald's stores will be found close together in most large urban centres. Thomadsen (2007) hypothesizes that "offsetting these incentives is the desirability of locating centrally to appeal to the most customers" (p. 792).
The study also revealed that when a Burger King store is "positioned differently enough, it finds that it is attractive to enough consumers that it begins to find that it can use prices to attract customers" (Thomadsen, 2007, p. 798). Thomadsen (2007) posits that the McDonald's corporation remains more aggressive in its quest to locate optimal locations compared to its competitor Burger King.
On the other hand, as Thomadsen (2007) notes, "Burger King...always works to avoid direct competition with McDonald's unless there is a large demand source, such as a mall, which would provide Burger King with enough customers to overcome its inability to be a strong competitor against McDonald's" (p. 803).
From a revenue standpoint, Thomadsen's (2007) study revealed that the variable profits that the McDonald's corporation earns tend to decrease when the nearest Burger King competitor is located in a separate yet proximal location of half a mile or more (Thomadsen, 2007).
As Thomadsen (2007) explains, this price drop occurs "because most consumers would patronize a McDonald's outlet over a Burger King outlet if the outlets were located in the same place.
However, when the outlets are located apart, some consumers who prefer McDonald's will instead eat at a Burger King because they are geographically located closer to the Burger King outlet" (p. 798). Similarly, Thomadsen's (2007) study showed that physical location affects consumer decision making.
As Thomadsen (2007) explains, "some consumers who prefer Burger King's food will be closer to McDonald's and eat there instead, but because more consumers prefer McDonald's food, the net flow of customers is from McDonald's to Burger King" (p. 798).
Both firms will generally gather around a "large, concentrated source of demand in the market" (Thomadsen, 2007, p. 801). This phenomenon can be observed in many other QSR firms also.
Thomadsen (2007) hypothesizes in this study that all QSR firms, in this case McDonald's and Burger King, will concentrate in the area of highest demand such as mall food courts. As Thomadsen (2007) explains, "if there were a large mall located in the center of the market, then each firm would choose to locate at the mall even though the other firm would locate there, too.
Similarly, if the center of the market were a "downtown" area with a greater concentration of demand, both firms would choose to locate in the downtown area...This can explain why McDonald's and Burger King outlets are often located together in high­ demand areas" (p. 801).
The same is also true of many other QSR competitors such as YUM! Brands and Subway. As a rule, these QSR firms knowingly face stiff competition - and as this study demonstrates, lose revenue as a result - in order to exist in the locations with the highest fast food consumer traffic (Thomadsen, 2007).
Apaydin (2011) conducted research into the consumer purchasing behaviour across multiple product categories, including the fast food product category, in relation to brand loyalty, brand awareness and brand image.
Apaydin (2011) sought to understand the relationship between consumer perceptions of global brands in a number of different categories and their decision making and buying choices using a sample of 182 Turkish college students.
 
The purpose of the research was to ascertain if these global brands possessed some supplementary emotional associations with the consumer sample that the same product offerings from local brands did not have.
As Apaydin (2011) notes, if global brands do have additional associations in the minds of consumers, "this has significant contributions to brand image and knowledge, and it enhances brand value which is likely to affect consumers' brand selection and loyalty behavior" (p. 26).
The researcher's aim in this research was to determine the emotional relationship between global brand choice and brand loyalty as a function of the consumer's self image.
Apaydin (2011) posited that if a global brand were associated with self concept or self worth, then it would be chosen above cheaper local brands in the same product category. As Apaydin (2011) explains, "brand loyalty was measured with the statement...! make my purchase according to my favorite global brand, regardless of price" (p. 28).
The results of this study were surprising and differed greatly previous studies. As Apaydin (2011) notes, the research demonstrated the global economic recession exacted a significant influence on consumer purchasing decisions in the fast food product category.
The consumers sampled in this study did not adhere to brand loyalty to the same extent that they have in previous studies. Apaydin (2011) "observed that global brand loyalty is far less than expected, which is not in line with the literature.
The possible reason might be related with global economic recession, which had a big impact on buying behaviors of consumers and strategies of companies. The period of the survey coincided with the economic recession which almost all countries have been experiencing for the last two years.
As this research was carried out in these years, the results are likely to be affected from it" (p. 32). The price sensitivity demonstrated by consumers during uncertain economic times became the most significant determinant of consumer purchasing behaviour in the fast food product category.
Apaydin (2011) presented an additional limiting factor of the study as the "lack of importance of these criteria as a basis for hamburger brand selection" (p. 32). The results suggest that fast food consumers do not necessarily equate the selection of fast food brands with self image.
As Apaydin (2011) explains, "respondents most strongly disagreed with parents and friends being influences on brand purchase, being loyal to brands, [brand] reputation...and brand choice being a reflection of self image" (p. 32).
Rather, the results indicated the consumers sampled chose a particular fast food brand based on the criteria of "value and variety seeking and convenience, which are explained by multi-brand, quality, novelty, price, time, and promotion. Different from the others, time is an important variable for the selection of this product type, which supports the reason why people prefer fast food" (Apaydin, 2011, p. 32).
Contrary to the results of previous studies in a similar vein, as Apaydin (2011) explains, "close environment is not effective for this group in the selection of the global brand" of fast food.
The main factors effecting consumer choice remained speed and cost, and the researcher concluded that the recession had a much stronger impact on consumer purchasing choices, one that superseded brand loyalty in the fast food product category (Apaydin, 2011).

Healthy Eating Lobby
In the U.K., concern over the ingredients - particularly fat and salt content - and the high caloric load of many QSR chains' offerings continues to increase as the obesity rates in the U.K. begin to mirror those of the United States (Bassett et al., 2007; Gereffi, Lee and Christian, 2009; Glayzer and Mitchell, 2008).
Obesity rates for British males have doubled since 1993, according to Glayzer and Mitchell (2008), and the researchers predict that based on current rates, "by 2050, 60% of men and 50% of women, and 25% of children will be obese" (p. 4).
Especially among children and teenagers, the U.K. population experienced a ballooning of waistlines in recent years and as a result, many healthy eating lobbyists have targeted the fast food industry (Consumers International, 2009; Keynote, 2010).
 
The issue for the healthy eating lobbyists remains convincing fast food restaurant chains to post caloric information at the point of purchase as a means of influencing the fast food consumer's purchasing decision. As Glayzer and Mitchell (2008) note:
Restaurants, fast food outlets and other takeaway establishments are currently excluded from any requirement to provide nutrition information at the point of sale. Voluntary schemes are in place in some areas, but formats vary, as do levels and type of outside assessment.
The Food Commission met with the Food Standards Agency in July 2008. The agency is currently conducting consumer research to determine what type of information would be most helpful, and is in discussion with fast food companies.
This has led to chain restaurants, including Burger King, McDonalds, KFC and Subway, committing to taking steps to offer more healthy options and to provide nutritional information to consumers, however none of these chains will offer prominent information on menu boards (p. 13).
The current public health lobby of the United Kingdom therefore does not intervene in the fast food industry to the same extent as its counterpart in the United States. However, as obesity rates continue to rise in the United Kingdom, the healthy eating lobby will likely exert more pressure on the fast food industry, and this pressure may have an impact on consumer purchasing decisions and ultimately on brand loyalty and brand equity.
In recent years, many studies have been conducted in order to investigate the impact of the healthy eating lobby on brand equity, brand loyalty and consumer purchasing decisions in the QSR industry. A number of studies have attempted to identify a causal link between consumer awareness of healthy eating habits and how this awareness may or may not affect their purchasing decisions when it comes to fast food.
These studies are of particular importance to the study at hand, given that this researcher seeks to ascertain the relationship between brand name fast food restaurants and consumer purchasing decisions.
Several studies suggest that the consumer purchasing decision has been affected by the healthy eating lobby, both in the United Kingdom and in the United States, while others suggest that the healthy eating lobby has effectively vilified certain fast food brands, namely McDonald's.
Whether or not the healthy eating lobby succeeded in minimizing or tarnishing the brand equity of QSR chains such as McDonald's and reducing the brand loyalty of fast food consumers remains a focus of this research, as does the impact of the healthy eating lobby on fast food restaurant chains' revenue.
In addition, this study seeks to determine if consumer purchasing decisions change when consumers are made aware of the caloric load of the fast food products they consume.
Several studies suggest that when fast food restaurants inform their consumers about the caloric content of the meals they order, consumers may change the order to a smaller meal or a meal that contains less calories, but the consumers remain with their fast food brand of choice rather than purchase lower calorie fast food from a competitor.
Glayzer and Mitchell (2008) assert that the trend of eating outside the home - more often than not at fast food chains - has contributed to the higher rates of obesity and heart disease. As Glazer and Mitchell (2008) assert, "eating out has become a major part of everyday life in the UK. Almost 30 percent of household expenditure on food is now allocated to eating outside the home [and] 30 percent of people surveyed eat out at least once a week.
This figure has doubled since 2003, when the average was 13 percent. Within the 18-24 age group the average number of people who eat out at least once a week is even higher, at 61 percent (p. 8).
Fast food firms such as McDonald's tend to take the brunt of the healthy food lobby's criticism, a fact that may contribute to the increased share of such QSR competitors of Subway, Eat Ltd., and Pret a Manger in London. Glayzer and Mitchell (2008) posit that most QSR firms serve fare that is "high in calories, saturated fat, sugar and salt, served in large portions, and priced in a way that makes large serving sizes more appealing" (p. 8).
Bassett et al. (2007) conducted research into the impact of posted caloric information on the purchasing behaviour of fast food consumers at the point of purchase using a comprehensive cross sectional survey.
 
The researchers endeavoured to distinguish the nature of the fast food consumers' food purchases, the nature of their observation and evaluation of the posted caloric information, as well as how the fast food patrons used the caloric information (Bassett et al., 2007).
The researchers compiled a random sample of 7318 respondents (Bassett et al., 2007). The study participants were gleaned from 300 fast food restaurant chains from roughly 1625 locations throughout the five boroughs of the city of New York that the researchers deemed eligible (Bassett et al., 2007).
The sample included 11 fast food restaurants: Wendy's, Au Bon Pain, Subway, Burger King, Domino's, Kentucky Fried Chicken, Taco Bell, McDonald's, Papa John's, Pizza Hut, and Popeye's (Bassett et al., 2007).
The stated goal of this study was to determine if fast food consumers altered their food choices or their fast food brand choices or both once they learned the caloric value of the meal that they had chosen (Bassett et al., 2007).
As Bassett et al. (2007) explain, the results of the survey demonstrated a slight reduction in caloric intake in response to the posted information; however, those surveyed did not take their business to a fast food competitor that offered a less calorically rich meal:
Those who reported seeing and using calorie information purchased 99 fewer calories than those who reported seeing the information and that it had no effect...
There was no significant difference in mean calories purchased by patrons reporting seeing but not using calorie information and patrons who reported not seeing calorie information...
[However), objective measurement of calorie content through examination of receipts confirmed that patrons who reported seeing and using calorie information purchased fewer calories than did those reporting that they did not see or use calorie information (p. 1458).
Thus, this study determined that point of purchase displaying of the caloric load of fast food meals prompts the consumer to purchase a lower calorie meal; however, the respondents sampled in this study did not deviate from their fast food brand of choice.
Rather, they chose a lower calorie alternative from the menu. The results of this study therefore support the idea that the brand equity fast food firms build with their customer sustains itself despite concerns for health and obesity.
Dixon, Eibel and Vadiveloo (2011) conducted similar research into the efficacy of product labelling in the fast food industry. The backdrop for this study was similar to that of the United Kingdom.
Concern in the United States with rising obesity rates prompted public health legislators in the states of New York and New Jersey to mandate the labelling of caloric intake of fast food meals in the same major QSR chains featured in this study, including McDonald's, Burger King, and Kentucky Fried Chicken.
Using a sample of 1,170 adults aged 18 years or older, Dixon, Eibel and Vadiveloo (2011) surveyed consumer purchasing behaviour in the fast food chains which had adopted the legislation. The researchers aimed to determine if the product labelling effectively reduced overall caloric intake in the sample group.
The researchers examined the sample "to determine whether the degree to which patrons noticed and reported using the calorie information was related to food purchasing patterns," namely, healthier food choices or reduced caloric intake (p. 52).
The results of this study supported the researchers' hypothesis that calorie labelling in major fast food chains would have an impact on purchasing decisions; however, the results did not support the idea that fast food consumer would choose a competitor of their fast food brand of choice such as Subway, regardless of the caloric reduction this chain offers compared to McDonald's, Burger King, or Kentucky Fried Chicken. Rather, the results indicated that the adults sampled would choose food items of lesser caloric value at their fast food brand of choice. As Dixon, Eibel and Vadiveloo (2011) note:
[the respondents] who reported noticing and using calorie labels to inform their food choices consumed more salads and ate out at fast food restaurants less often than adults who did not notice the labels.
Adults who noticed calorie labels but reported not using the information also ate at fast food restaurants less often and were less likely to order caloric beverages than adults who did not see the labels. This suggests that calorie labels may provide some benefit to all consumers who observe them, regardless of whether they report using them (p. 32).
 
The researchers caution that although the results of this study offer hope for public health legislators in the area of obesity and its concomitant health problems such as diabetes and coronary heart disease, "it is not possible to definitively attribute these favourable differences to calorie labels, because adults who notice labels may differ from adults who do not notice labels.
Adults who notice labels, for example, may have a stronger interest in health, which influences their food purchasing decisions" (p. 32). While the decision to choose healthier options in the fast food product category, according to the results of this study, may rest with the individual fast food consumer, brand loyalty appears to prevail in the face of higher calories.

Carbohydrates not Fast Food
Several studies have come to light that counter the theory that fast food is the main culprit behind the expanding girth of adults and children in both the United Kingdom and the United States.
Rather, a number of researchers from several different disciplines offer the explanation that consumer purchasing decisions in the area of carbohydrate intake represent the main driver in the obesity epidemic, specifically, the prevalence of high carbohydrate snack foods.
Patterson, Richards and Tegene (2007) conducted research into the hypothesis that obesity stems from a rational addiction to carbohydrate rich snack foods rather than fast foods per se.
The main research question that guided this study asked that if fast food "consumers are rational, utility-maximizing agents as economists assume, how can their demand for food be so clearly suboptimal from a health perspective?
This study...tests whether consumers' rational addiction to specific macronutrients constitutes a viable explanation for the rising incidence of obesity" (Patterson, Richards and Tegene, 2007, p. 309).
Rather than blame the fast food industry for the skyrocketing obesity rates, this study points to the role of carbohydrates and between meal snacking as the main driver in weight gain. As Patterson, Richards and Tegene (2007) note:
Despite the fact that much media attention and public debate has centred on "high-fat" fast food as a likely culprit in the obesity epidemic, our finding suggests a focus rather on increased consumption of high-carbohydrate foods.
Drawing such a conclusion would be questionable if there were only marginal differences in the nutrient content of the foods included in the model. However, our analysis considers snack foods, a category that includes intensive sources of dietary fat... [such as] potato chips... as well as others that are very high in carbohydrate...[such as] pretzels [and] cookies (p. 317).
The results of this study provided a potential alternative explanation for the obesity epidemic, one that does not directly implicate the fast food industry.
This study suggests that the consumer purchasing decision process in the area of snack foods is unduly and negatively influenced by an addition to the micronutrients in carbohydrates, and that snack foods require legislation and regulation rather than fast foods. Whether or not this and other studies will convince the healthy eating lobby remains to be seen.
Legal scholar Todd G. Buchholz (2003) conducted a study to examine the obesity epidemic from a legal perspective. This study remains of particular interest to the healthy eating lobby, as several lawsuits have been filed against large fast food brands such as McDonald's in an attempt to seek compensation for obesity health complications (Buchholz, 2003).
This study revealed some interesting facts in regards to the actual caloric load of the average fast food meal. As Buchholz (2003) notes, "fast food has expanded menus for changes in taste and health concerns. Fast food meals today derive fewer calories from fat than they did in the 1970s. Fast food [also] has a smaller percentage of calories from fat than a typical home cooked meal in 1977" (p. 1).
Fast food menus typically contain a high amount of protein; for low income individuals especially, Buchholz (2003), fast food restaurants offer an economically viable means to get protein into their diets.
In addition, Buchholz (2003) notes, should the impact of the healthy eating lobby lead to an increase in obesity lawsuits against fast food chains, several negative effects may results, including "lower wages for [fast food] employees, lower stock prices for [fast food] shareholders, [and] higher prices for [fast food] consumers" (p. 2).
Several fast food chains that have come under fire from the healthy eating lobby have taken steps to offer healthier fare at their restaurants through strategic alliances with purveyors of healthy foods and beverages.
 
An example is the co-branding strategy that occurred in 2007 in the United Kingdom, when McDonald's U.K. began selling children's smoothies manufactured by a U.K. company named Innocent in its Happy Meals (Ritson, 2007).
Innocent built its reputation as an eco-friendly, anti-corporate entity devoted to selling healthy drinks; thus, critics of the co­ branding initiative argued that Innocent would lose business as a result of the affiliation with McDonald's, which many U.K. consumers deemed damaging to their children's health.
McDonald's, on the other hand, viewed the co-branding strategy as a means to actively promote healthier choices as part of its standard menu.
Ritson (2007) observed that while both brands had built solid equity in the United Kingdom, consumer purchasing decisions might be affected, since a significant disparity existed between the McDonald's fast food consumer and the Innocent smoothie consumer.
However, the co-branding strategy in this case worked, Ritson (2007) argued, because both brands were established. As Ritson (2007) explains, "brand theory has...become more nuanced.
Many strong brands are able to build brand equity even if they retail in some incongruous locations" (p. 19). Furthermore, Ritson (2007) notes, co-branding theory supports the idea that when too robust brand enter into partnership, both brands ultimately benefit from a co-branding strategy. This benefit will be felt regardless of the pre-existing characteristics of the brand's core consumer base (Ritson, 2007). As Ritson (2007) explains:
When two brands' products are associated, both brands win. The positive associations and loyal consumers from each brand are transferred to the other. Innocent will become more mainstream and engage with another 5 million potential consumers.
McDonald's will become fresher, healthier and trustworthier.

Better still, none of the negative associations from either brand are likely to cross over, as co-brand research suggests only positive associations are exchanged. So Innocent won't become tarnished with ecological unsoundness or junk-food associations (p. 19).
In the fast food industry besieged by the healthy eating lobby, McDonald's U.K. has definitely become the target of choice, therefore any affiliation with a healthier alternative will likely bolster its sales.

London Based Fast Food Consumer Outlook on American Brands
Fullerton et al. (2010) conducted a study examining the relationship between brand attitudes and consumers in countries outside of the United States and discovered an unexpected outcome of the ongoing health eating lobby which has targeted many fast food firms, including McDonald's, in recent years.
Fullerton et al. (2010) reported that when the respondents in their study were "describing Americans, the keyword fatwas
invoked by almost one-fifth of respondents, while fast-food brand McDonald's emerged as the most disliked brand.

Perhaps, in the minds of international young adults, McDonald's is linked with a constellation of negative attributes, including cultural imperialism, business globalization and American obesity" (p. 249).
The study surveyed the attitudes of 67 international students attending college in London toward some of the most powerful American brands, including the fast food giant McDonald's (Fullerton, Kendrick and Randolph, 2010).
The study revealed that the relationship between international consumers and American brands remains complex and relatively individual; in many cases, the effect of American values and way of life is rejected while products and brand that originate in the United States remain widely sought after and welcomed.
"Numerous polls and studies reveal that while international audiences grew to think worse of American foreign policy, they still liked American people and businesses and they kept up their purchase patterns of American brands" (Fullerton, Kendrick and Randolph, 2010, p. 246).
Thus the impact of cultural attitudes, favourable or unfavourable, toward top fast food brands from the United States appears to exact an influence on customer's purchasing decisions, particularly in the case of global, high equity brands such as McDonald's.
 
Chan et al. (2007) conducted a study that examined the relationship between brand attitudes towards products engineered in the United States and preferences for brands that originate in the United States among university students from Australia, Hong Kong and Singapore. The researchers used a sample of 556 students attending higher education institutions in those three countries.
Of the sample surveyed, the QSR giant McDonald's was consistently named as a favourite brands by students from two of the countries: in Australia, 9.9 per cent of the students named McDonald's as a favourite brand, and 11.5 per cent of the students from Hong Kong also named McDonald's.
Interestingly, this study also demonstrated that McDonald's was one of the "most frequently mentioned US brand that the students in Australia said they disliked... [and] another 7.5 per cent [of the students from Hong Kong] included it on their least­ liked brand list" (Chan et al., 2007, p. 10).
Roberts (2004) has coined the trademark qualities of what he calls a "lovemark brand [as] emotional attachment and intense loyalty" (p. 12). For the QSR brand, this study suggests that consumers within the same demographic may view McDonald's as a lovemark brand while simultaneously viewing it as a loathemark brand (Chan et al., 2007; Roberts, 2004).
The pervasiveness of the McDonald's brand indicates that brand awareness and brand equity is so high that consumers may harbour polarizing brand attitudes within the same demographic.
In a study gauging attitudes toward American brands in three Pacific Rim countries, Fullerton et al. (2007) applied the term loathemark to a brand or a concept that evoked hatred and rejection to both itself and the country it represents. The researchers noted that the same brands, such as Coca Cola, McDonald's and Nike, could achieve both lovemark and loathemark status among international consumers (Fullerton et al., 2007).
This study provides further support for the complex relationship between fast food consumers in the United Kingdom and fast food brands that originate in the United States, and how this relationship affects the consumer purchasing process in the fast food product category.
De Bres (2005) conducted research into the impact of the penultimate American fast food brand, McDonald's, on the culture of the United Kingdom. De Bres (2005) argues that the McDonald's corporation has become more than a mere vendor of fast food; rather, the restaurant chain "does not modify its way of doing business to adapt to foreign cultures, but changes local cultures to meet its own needs" (p. 115).
As a result of this attitude, De Bres (2005) posits, the brand has earned the ire of many a cultural critic, including the vilifying comment by Watson (2002) that the McDonald's brand represents a "saturated symbol for everything that environmentalists, protectionists, and anti-capitalist activists find objectionable about American culture" (p. 352).
However, the impact of cultural distaste for American values amongst London QSR consumers does not appear to definitively affect their purchasing decisions. As Fullerton (2005) notes, "the death of Brand America is greatly exaggerated...For example, the French do not hold especially favourable attitudes towards George W. Bush, but they have no problem eating at McDonald's on the Champs-Elysees" (p. 132).
The main criticism of McDonald's from a cultural perspective is its status as "an icon of global homogenization of both landscapes and culinary tastes that are identified with" implicit American values and lifestyles (De Bres, 2005, p. 124). In addition, the McDonald's brand maintains a "cultural hegemony which disregards local popular culture and conventions" (De Bres, 2005, p. 124).
In the United Kingdom, De Bres (2005) argues, the McDonald's brand "has established a sense of place that is recognized worldwide, [and] in doing so other, older notions of identity and belonging may be challenged" (p. 124).
From the perspective of culture, the global fast food brands such as McDonald's have successfully infiltrated foreign cultures and as such stand as purveyors of the cultural ethos that describes their country of origin.
While De Bres (2005) notes a McDonald's consumer survey in 1994 lambasted the brand as "loud, brash, complacent, uncaring, insensitive, insincere, suspicious, disciplinarian, and arrogant," the success of the fast food chain in the United Kingdom cannot be denied (p. 125).
 
Demand for McDonald's products remains high. This reality, as well as the finding of the other studies reviewed in this chapter, appears to support the researcher's position that brand equity and brand loyalty toward fast food chains, even those that originate in foreign countries such as the United States, will supersede cultural opposition in the London fast food consumer purchasing decision process.

Summary
Chapter II contains the literature review. The literature review has been divided into several subsections that discuss various elements of the topic; these subsections are designed to support and expand upon the research questions that guide the study as a whole.
These subsections include new products and product innovations, the customer value proposition offered, discussions about promotions and strategies, and the impact of the obesity epidemic and corresponding healthy eating lobby on QSR firms' brand equity, brand loyalty, and sales. Chapter II also contains an overview of some studies that investigate the London consumer outlook on American brands.
Methodology
The following chapter outlines the methods used to investigate the central research question: does brand name have an impact on the customer decision-making process in the top five London fast-food restaurant chains? The study utilizes both primary and secondary research in an effort to determine the answers to the guiding research questions.
The primary research method consists of a random survey that the researcher conducted in London using a random sample of London fast food consumers as participants. The secondary research method utilizes the qualitative research technique of document analysis to develop the thesis that cost rather than brand name exacts the largest influence on customer decision­ making processes in London fast-food establishments.
The sample of participants that the researcher used for the fast food consumer survey was selected randomly from consumers based in and around the greater London metropolitan area.
A large segment of the consumer population in London city proper has been identified as regular patrons of fast food establishments such as Subway, KFC, Domino's Pizza, and McDonald's; therefore, exploring the buying behavior and purchasing decision processes demonstrated by this group may offer some new insights for both fast food firms and marketing researchers.
The size of the primary research sample was 120. Of this sample, three sub groups were delineated into smaller groups of 30 participants, according to the age of the respondent: respondents aged 18 to 30; respondents aged 30 to 45, and respondents aged 45 to 60. A total of 120 adults completed the survey, which was then evaluated using statistical analyses.
The researcher endeavoured to determine a measure of brand loyalty among the respondents for the fast food firms featured in this study: Subway, YUM! Brands, which includes KFC, Taco Bell and Pizza Hut, Domino's Pizza, McDonald's, Eat Ltd., and Pret a Manger.
Within the product category of fast food, the goal of the survey was to measure brand loyalty and its impact on the London fast food consumer's purchasing decision process.
The researcher anticipated that varying degrees of attachment and loyalty to global fast food brand names would become apparent vis a vis the survey; therefore nine individual survey questions were developed and used in the survey to measure different instances of the London fast food customer's purchasing decision process and buying behavior in the fast food product category.

While the sample size remains on the small side, the researcher expects that the respondents' answers will nonetheless offer some key insights into the complex relationship between fast food consumers, global fast food brands, and consumer purchasing decision processes and buying behaviour.
The information gleaned from these responses will be of value to both fast food firms seeking brand equity measurement and demonstrated instances of brand loyalty in action.
The researcher also anticipates that the results of the survey will be of value in an academic capacity for market researchers, and will contribute to the existing body of knowledge circulating in regards to brand equity, brand awareness, brand loyalty, consumer behaviour, and the consumer purchasing decision process in the fast food product category.
 
Survey Questions
The researcher crafted the survey questions in a manner designed to reveal brand engagement in the London fast food consumer and ascertain the extent to which brand engagement, brand attachment and brand loyalty affected the consumer's purchase decision process. The researcher posed the following questions to each of the respondents, according to his or her corresponding age group:
1.	Do you care about the brand name when you are selecting a fast food restaurant?

2.	If the answer to the first question is yes, does the fast food restaurant need to be a globally recognised brand?

3.	In your opinion, why do you believe that globally recognised fast food brand names are better than local or unrecognised fast food brands?
4.	Do you believe there is a significant difference in product quality between globally recognised fast food brand names and local or unrecognised fast food brands?
5.	Would you be willing to spend more money for a branded fast food product?

6.	What is the maximum amount you would be willing to spend on a branded fast food product per person in the current economic environment?
7.	Would you be willing to change your regular fast food branded restaurant in case of a price increase?

8.	Would you be willing to switch from your regular fast food branded restaurant to a normal restaurant if it offered higher quality food?
9.	Do marketing and promotion campaigns from competitor fast food branded restaurant change your image about other brands?

Survey Format
The survey was designed to attract responses pertaining to brand awareness, brand equity, brand loyalty, brand engagement and brand attachment among London fast food consumers.
The researcher posed questions in a manner which would demonstrate the impact of brand equity on the consumer's purchasing decision process. The survey questions were sufficiently open ended to facilitate unbiased responses from the participants, while maintaining enough specificity to be useful markers of brand engagement and brand attachment.
Study Design
The research design of a study refers to the methods that the researcher employs to obtain the information for use within the study (De Vaus, 2001; Denzin, 1970; Schumacher and McMillan, 1993).
The design of the research must facilitate objectivity to the best of the researcher's ability (De Vaus, 2001; Denzin, 1970; Schumacher and McMillan, 1993). The research design also needs to permit the researcher to respond to each of the research questions in the most unequivocal manner possible (De Vaus, 2001; Denzin, 1970; Schumacher and McMillan, 1993).
The goal of this study was to determine the impact of fast-food brand names on buyer behaviour in London. The purpose of the research was to ascertain the extent to which London-based quick-service restaurant consumers factor brand recognition or brand awareness when presented with choice between the top five competing fast food firms in the city.
The researcher intended to glean whether or not the brand name has an effect on customer decision-making processes in London, to what extent the brand name helps fast food firms to attract more customers around London, and to what extent cost factors in to decision-making process, independent of brand awareness.
The researcher also sought to understand how the strength of a brand name may or may not give fast food firms a competitive advantage over one another.
Document analysis refers to an orderly method of examining and appraising various forms of documents as a means to acquire meaning and relevance for a research study.
In the same manner as several other analytical procedures and techniques found in qualitative research, document analysis entails that the collected data be investigated and decoded to discover relevance, acquire understanding, and build upon the existing base of observed knowledge in relation to the phenomenon or phenomena under investigation (Bowen, 2009; Corbin
 
and Strauss, 2008; Patton, 1990; Rapley, 2007).

The principal research caveat that the researcher encountered - which will be discussed under study limitations - is that in document analysis, the documents under investigation "contain text..., words...and images that have been recorded without a researcher's intervention" (Bowen, 2009, p. 28).
The documents that a researcher might use for a study based in the document analysis method of qualitative research vary widely. The researcher may choose to employ a number of items for "systematic evaluation" once he or she has deemed them relevant to the research questions (Bowen, 2009, p. 28).
These items include "advertisements, agendas, attendance registers, and minutes of meetings, manuals, background papers, books and brochures, diaries and journals, event programs [and] printed outlines, letters and memoranda, maps and charts, newspaper clippings and articles, press releases, program proposals, application forms, and summaries, radio and television program scripts, organisational or institutional reports, survey data, and various public records.
Scrapbooks and photo albums can also furnish documentary material for research purposes" (Bowen, 2009, p. 28).

This study utilizes a range of print sources, consumer surveys, academic journals, official government statistics, economic reports, and business backgrounders, as well as electronically based sources such as computer generated material and material created and disseminated for and by the Internet to meet the research goals and purposes hitherto discussed, and expound upon existing knowledge in the field of brand management (Bowen, 2009; Corbin and Strauss, 2008; Labuschagne, 2003).
The critical method employed in document analysis procedures requires the acquisition, distillation, and critical evaluation of the data gleaned from within the documents that the researchers assembles; decoding occurs at the same time that the researcher synthesizes the information obtained from the documents (Bowen, 2009; Corbin and Strauss, 2008; Denzin and Lincoln, 2011; Labuschagne, 2003).
Thus, the researcher determines the relevance of the documents to the research questions as he or she encounters them. The document analysis research method generates data such as extracts, quotes, or full cited passages that the researcher then classifies according to any significant themes that develop (Bowen, 2009; Corbin and Strauss, 2008; Labuschagne, 2003).
Key themes, groupings, and patterns emerge specifically via the close analytical relationship that develops between the researcher and the content (Bowen, 2009; Labuschagne, 2003).
As a research technique, document analysis remains perfectly suitable for qualitative case studies or "intensive studies producing rich descriptions of a single phenomenon, event, organisation, or program" (Bowen, 2009, p. 29; Stake, 1995; Yin, 1994). The documents collected using the document analysis research method provides several different purposes of use to the qualitative researcher embarking upon a study.
The material collected as part of document analysis research method gives the researcher access to areas of research that would remain unavailable in other qualitative research practices and methods such as surveys and interviews. As Bowen (2009) explains, "documents can provide data on the context within which research participants operate.
The information contained in documents can suggest some questions that need to be asked and situations that need to be observed as part of the research documents provide supplementary research data.
Information and insights derived from documents can be valuable additions to a knowledge base documents provide a means of tracking change and development documents can be analysed as a way to verify findings or corroborate evidence from other sources" (p. 29).
For the purposes of this study, the researcher chose the document analysis research method for the following reasons:

Economical Technique
Compared to other forms of qualitative research, the document analysis research method occupies less time for the researcher, as it "requires data selection, instead of data collection" (Bowen, 2009, p. 29). Efficiency-wise, the document analysis research method surpasses other research methods.
Ease of Use
 
Compared to other forms of qualitative research, many of the documents used in this study were available via online sources. As Bowen (2009) explains, "many documents are in the public domain, especially since the advent of the Internet, and are obtainable without the authors' permission" (p. 29).

Low Cost Alternative
Compared to other forms of qualitative research, the document analysis research method of data collection remains more cost effective. Similarly, researchers often employ the document analysis research method when the acquisition of new data cannot be made economically viable.
As Bowen (2009) explains, "the data ...contained in documents...have already been gathered; what remains is for the content and quality of the documents to be evaluated" (p. 29).
Less Intrusion and Built-In Guards against Reactivity and Reflexivity
Reactivity in psychology and sociology refers to the phenomenon that occurs when research subjects internalize the understanding that they are being observed and alter their behaviour as a result (Heppner et al., 2008).
In research design, "the dependent variable should be sensitive to some characteristic of the participant, but the assessment process itself should not affect the characteristic directly; that is, the dependent measure should indicate how the participant functions normally.
Sometimes, something about obtaining scores on dependent measure alters the situation so that false readings are obtained... For example, a person may smoke less when asked to record the number of cigarettes smoked" (Heppner et al., 2008, p. 331).
The documents obtained via the document analysis research method remain inconspicuous and lacking in reactivity because they are "unaffected by the research process" (Bowen, 2009, p. 29).
The document analysis research method of data collection safeguards against the "the concerns related to reflexivity...or the lack of it...inherent in other qualitative research methods" (Bowen, 2009, p. 29). Similarly, reflexivity in qualitative research refers to the impact that the researcher will have upon the research (Bowen, 2009; Finlay and Gough, 2003).
Reflexivity is the ongoing "project of examining how the researcher and intersubjective elements impact upon and transform research" (Finlay and Gough, 2003, p. 4).
Reflexivity necessitates an ongoing attentiveness to the researcher's role in the creation of meanings that stem from interpersonal communications, and requires the recognition that the researcher can and often does influence the findings of his or her research, consciously or unconsciously (Bowen, 2009; Finlay and Gough, 2003).
In the document analysis research method, observation does not affect the documents themselves, because they are static, non-human subjects (Bowen, 2009).

Constancy
In the document analysis research method, the gathered documents remain fixed, stable objects appropriate for several re­ examinations and reassessments as the research project progresses (Bowen, 2009). The constancy of the documents also means that the presence of the researcher does not transform their content (Bowen, 2009; Merriam, 1988).

Accuracy
For researchers, the presence of precise names, dates, occurrences, facts, and information found in the document gathered during the document analysis research method makes these documents particularly beneficial during the study phase (Bowen, 2009; Yin, 1994).

Treatment
The documents collected as part of the during the document analysis research method typically cover a wide range of historical periods, proceedings, and facts (Bowen, 2009; Yin, 1994).
These documents also record numerous settings, contexts, and points of view; therefore, the documents treat a far more broad range of perspectives, cultures and socioeconomic backgrounds than a single researcher could gain access to in a single survey or interview setting (Bowen, 2009; Yin, 1994)
 
Throughout the study, the researcher intended to demonstrate the ability to recognize relevant data from the document sources collected and to detach it from the data that the researcher deemed irrelevant or secondary (Bowen, 2009; Corbin and Strauss, 2008).
The researcher also relied significantly on thematic analysis to conduct this study. Thematic analysis refers to a type of pattern identification that emerges from within the data sources, as they are being studied, that proves relevant to the research questions (Bowen, 2009; Fereday and Muir-Cochrane, 2006).
The method of thematic analysis follows a thorough, close reading of the documents under investigation; the data under review is closely analyzed to discover inherent patterns (Bowen, 2009; Fereday and Muir-Cochrane, 2006).
The researcher performs a thorough evaluation of the chosen data and determines specific "coding and category construction, based on the data's characteristics, to uncover themes pertinent to a phenomenon" (Bowen, 2009, p. 33).
These rising themes eventually derive the categories that organize the overall structure of the study and the phenomenon under analysis, in this case buyer behaviour and brand recognition (Bowen, 2009; Fereday and Muir-Cochrane, 2006).
The secondary research method of analysis utilizes the qualitative research technique of document analysis to develop the thesis that cost rather than brand name exacts the largest influence on customer decision-making processes in London fast­ food establishments.
The researcher posits that brand recognition plays a significant role in the decision-making process of the London fast food consumer. The study also analyzes other consumer surveys conducted in London between the years 2009 and 2011 to determine the impact of the global recession on London-based consumers' fast-food restaurant preferences.

Purpose of the Study
The aim of the study was to determine the relationships between the brand names of top fast-food restaurants in London and the consumer decision making process.
The ultimate goal of the research was to demonstrate a causal link between brand engagement, brand loyalty, and brand attachment and the consumer decision making process when choosing fast food restaurants in London. The guiding research question that informed the study sought to answer the question do London fast food consumers care about brand names when choosing fast food restaurants?
The consumer survey facilitated the creation of useful primary research and a sample of respondents indicative of a larger group of consumers.
The researcher conducted the consumer survey in an effort to access the target market most likely to provide useful and timely information for the purposes of the study, as well as those most likely to offer pertinent responses to the research questions based on their own real time experiences with the brand.
The qualitative research method of document analysis used to analyse the secondary research in this study allowed the researcher to study a wide range of primary and secondary documents in order to cement a theory around brand recognition, brand awareness, brand strategy, consumer spending, consumer decision-making, and the influence of the economic climate between 2009 and 2011 on all of these factors.

Research Questions
The following research questions guided the study:

1.	What do the fast food customers in London think of fast food restaurants, and how important is a brand name to them when making food choices?
2.	Do fast food customers in London really care about brand name, or do they select it due to the low price?

3.	How do the fast food customers in London compare their regular restaurant with its competitive firms?

4.	Do fast food firms acquire any form of a competitive advantage due to their brand name?

5.	To what extent do marketing and promotion campaigns attract people from competitive brands?
 
The researcher made every attempt to interpret both the primary and the secondary sources of research collected using these five questions as guides.
Data Collection
Data collection is a vital element of a research study that helps to legitimize the research findings; it also affords the study with credibility and maintains the integrity of the study and the researcher's purpose.
The results of the consumer survey were collected using the surveys distributed to a random sample of fast food patrons among the top six fast food firms in London: Subway, McDonald's, YUM! Brands, including Pizza Hut, Taco Bell and KFC, Domino's Pizza, Eat Ltd., and Pret a Manger.
For the purposes of this study, the grounded theory developed by Glaser and Strauss (1967) directed the collection of documents used to create the body of secondary research. Grounded theory refers to the uncovering of a viable theoretical direction for research gleaned from the data itself (Glaser and Strauss, 1967).
As Bowen (2009) explains, "in grounded theory research, as in other forms of qualitative inquiry, the investigator is the primary instrument of data collection and analysis" (p. 29). In this dual role of investigator and analyst, the researcher "relies on skills as well as intuition and filters data through an interpretive lens" (Bowen, 2009, p. 29).
As both investigator and analyst, the researcher concurrently mines and examines the data that has been extracted from the selected documents in a form of hypothetical sampling, or as Strauss and Corbin (1990) explain, "sampling on the basis of concepts that have proven theoretical relevance to the evolving theory" (p. 176).
In data collection based on grounded theory, the theory that guides the study evolves via the concomitant collection of data, and the researcher serves the simultaneous functions of theory designer, theory builder, and data filtration unit (Bowen, 2009; Charmaz, 2011; Glaser and Strauss, 1967).

Data Analysis
The results of the consumer survey were examined using analyses of variance. The analyses were conducted to determine whether or not the survey results demonstrated a significant statistical difference between the responses across the three different age groups represented by the survey.
The researcher endeavoured to measure brand loyalty as indicated by score - high scores were interpreted to indicate a particular loyalty with a corresponding global fast food brand.
In addition, the attitudes and beliefs that determine the consumer purchasing decision process and buying behaviour in regards to the brand were examined. The researcher interpreted the results according to the age group reflected by the responses.
For the purposes of this study, the constant comparative method developed by Glaser and Strauss (1967) directed the data analysis. The data analysis was established upon an inductive methodology. The constant comparative method "does not supplant the skills and sensitivities required in generating theory.
Rather, the constant comparative method is designed to aid the analyst who possesses these abilities in generating a theory that is integrated, consistent, plausible [and] close to the data....
Still dependent on the skills and sensitivities of the analyst, the constant comparative method is not designed...as methods of quantitative analysis are...to guarantee that two analysts working independently with the same data will achieve the same results.
It is designed to allow, with discipline, for some of the vagueness and flexibility that aid the creative generation of theory" (p. 103).
As such, the researcher aimed to make out patterns and models within the data collected that supported the theoretical goals of the project, while simultaneously recognizing and cataloguing relevant theoretical elements located in the data that could lead to further insights (Bowen, 2009; Glaser and Strauss, 1967)
 
Study Limitations
In regards to the primary research, the main limitation of the consumer survey remains the small size of the sample. At 120 respondents, the sample may be too small to reflect the buying behaviour and the consumer purchasing decision process undertaken by the London fast food consumer when choosing a fast food restaurant.
Also, the sample itself did not take into consideration any other factors besides age which might influence brand loyalty and the consumer purchasing decision process such as gender, socio-economic status, religion, race, or country of origin.
Aside from the basic limitations of reactivity and lack of reflexivity inherent in all forms of qualitative research previously discussed, the document analysis research method utilized for the secondary research component contains several limitations that may affect the outcome of the study.
The most significant limitation of the document analysis research method is that the documents themselves may lack crucial details (Bowen, 2009; Yin, 1994). Documents created outside of the research paradigm are by nature created for another purpose besides research; their original purpose affects the quality and quantity of valid research that they contain.
The documents might have been intended to sell, persuade, dissuade, or assert a particular agenda. As such, they may or may not contain the detail sufficient to answer the research questions (Bowen, 2009; Yin, 1994). In addition, the details that the documents do contain may be cursory or irrelevant.
Secondly, in the case of documents produced for purpose besides research, the researcher may encounter issues related to lack of retrievability (Bowen, 2009; Yin, 1994).
As Bowen (2009) explains, "document created independent of a research agenda...are sometimes not retrievable, or retrievability is difficult" (p. 33). In addition, in some cases the researcher will encounter intentional obstacles to the retrieval of the information contained in the documents (Bowen, 2009; Yin, 1994).
Thirdly, documents created for purposes other than research may contain an inherent bias associated with their original purpose (Bowen, 2009; Yin, 1994). This phenomenon, known as "biased selectivity" occurs when a document or collection of documents deliberately omits a key event or piece of information (Bowen, 2009; Yin, 1994, p. 80).
This inherent selection bias on the part of the document's originators affects the objectivity of the whole document and must be taken into account by the researcher. As Bowen (2009) explains, "in an organisational context, the available...selected... documents are likely to be aligned with corporate policies and procedures and with the agenda of the organisation's principals" (p. 33).

Summary
Chapter Ill describes the methodology of the research and outlines the design of the study. This chapter contains an overview of the data collection and data analysis methods used to interpret the findings from the consumer survey that served as the primary research component of the study.
Chapter Ill also includes a detailed description and explanation of the document analysis research method used by the researcher to conduct the secondary research component of the study.
This chapter contains a description of the grounded theory approach used by the researcher in the collection of the research data, and also describes the constant comparative method the researcher employed to analyze the data collected (Bowen, 2009; Glaser and Strauss, 1967).
In addition, this chapter contains the research questions that guided the study and the consumer survey questions, and describes the limitations of the chosen research designs and methods that may affect the outcome of the study findings.
Findings
Robust brand equity remains significantly associated with increased revenues for fast food restaurants (Kim and Kim, 2004; Lee, 2011). Several previous studies featured in this literature review have demonstrated the direct correlation between brand recognition, brand equity, brand awareness, brand image, brand loyalty, and the consumer purchasing decision process.
 
Studies also support the theory that fast food brands with strong brand equity enjoy a higher degree of perceived quality among the consumers that have become attached to that brand. Fast food consumers that display brand loyalty will actively choose their fast food brand over competitors, often despite marketing and promotional tactics such as lower prices (Kim and Kim, 2004; Lee, 2011)
The following study endeavoured to test the power of brand names as a means of influencing the buying behaviour and the consumer purchasing decision process of fast food consumers in the city of London. The goal of the survey was to determine the extent to which brand equity and brand loyalty factors in to the consumer's purchase decision.
The researcher's hypothesis for the study is that brand equity affects consumer choices and consumer buying behaviour. Brand awareness, brand equity and brand loyalty demonstrated significant effect on the purchasing decisions of the consumers surveyed.
The results also demonstrate that brand loyalty affects the choice of restaurant to the exclusion of other factors such as availability and cost. The results also indicate that the quality of the food purchased remains of paramount importance to the London fast food consumers that the researcher surveyed.
The researcher separated the primary data into nine different tables that corresponded with each of the survey questions. For the primary data, the researcher utilized a total sample size of 120 adult respondents.
This sample was then further delineated into a sample size that corresponded with each group: 30 participants in the age group represented by 18 through 30 year olds; the age group represented by 31 through 45 year olds, and the age group represented by 46 through 60 year old.
These samples included fast food adult consumers located in the city of London. These respondents were chosen at random. The participants received survey questionnaires in regards to their purchasing behaviour for the brand name fast food retailers in London. The results of each question are listed below:
Sample Size for Each Age Group: 30 (30x3 =120)


Table 1. Survey Question: Do you care about the brand name of the restaurant when you are selecting a fast food restaurant?

Table 1 indicates the responses to the question do you care about the brand name if you are selecting fast food restaurant? The respondents were asked the question and then given the following choices of response: Yes I do, Not at all, Maybe, and Other. In the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds, the vast majority of the respondents - 21 out of 30 - responded Yes I do.
16 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 31 to 45 year olds answered Yes I do, while 11 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds answered yes I do. The results of the survey responses to this question indicate that younger fast food consumers in London are more brand loyal and are more influenced by the brand name of a fast food purveyor when they make their purchasing decisions.
 
 

Table 2. Survey Question: If the response to the first question was yes I do, does the fast food restaurant need to be a globally recognised brand in order for you to choose it?
Table 2 indicates the responses to the question if the response to the first question was yes I do, does the fast food restaurant need to be a globally recognised brand in order for you to choose it? T
he respondents were asked the question and then given the following choices of response: Yes, No, Depends on the food that I'm looking for, and Other. In the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds, the vast majority of the respondents - 23 out of 30 - responded Yes.
18 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds answered Yes, while 18 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Yes.
The results of the survey responses to this question indicate that while younger fast food consumers in London are more likely to choose a brand name fast food restaurant and are more influenced by the brand name of a fast food purveyor when they make their purchasing decisions, the same is also true of older clientele.


Table 3. Survey Question: According to you, do you think that globally recognised brand name fast food restaurants are better than unrecognised fast food restaurants?
Table 3 indicates the responses to the question according to you, do you think that globally recognised brand name fast food restaurants are better than unrecognised fast food restaurants?The respondents were asked the question and then given the following choices of response: Yes, because that means the food is better, Yes, because that means the service is better, Both one and two are correct, and Other.
n the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds, nearly 50 percent of the respondents -11 out of 30 - responded Yes, because that means the food is better. 6 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds answered Yes, because that means the food is better, while 8 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Yes, because that means the food is better.
 
6 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered Yes, because that means the service is better. 3 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds answered Yes, because that means the service is better, while 5 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Yes, because that means the service is better.
Overwhelmingly, the respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds and 46 to 60 year olds chose both answers.
The results of the survey responses to this question indicate that while the fast food consumers in London reflected in this survey are far more likely to hold a higher perception of the quality of the food produced by a fast food brand name when they make their purchasing decisions. Consumer perception of the quality and superiority of the brand over its competitors therefore remains consistent across all three age groups.


Table 4. Survey Question: Do think there's a significant different in products between globally recognise brand names and others?
Table 4 indicates the responses to the question do think there's a significant different in products between globally recognised brand names and others?The respondents were asked the question and then given the following choices of response: Yes, No, Sometimes, and Other.
n the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds, the overwhelming majority of the respondents - 22 out of 30 - responded Yes. 23 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered Yes, while 21 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Yes.
Only 4 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered No. 5 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds answered No, while 4 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered No.
Overwhelmingly, the respondents in the age categories represented by 18 to 30 year olds, 31 to 45 year olds and 46 to 60 year olds chose Yes as a response.
The results of the survey responses to this question indicate that the fast food consumers in London reflected in this survey are far more likely to believe that the quality of the food products offered by a fast food brand name is superior to its competitors as well as to unrecognised brands in the same product category.
Therefore, the responses to this question indicate that fast food consumers are predisposed to choose global brand names based on an assumption of superiority, which in turn affects their buying behaviour and their purchasing decisions. Consumer perception of the quality and superiority of the brand over its competitors again remains consistent across all three age groups.
 
 

Table 5. Survey Question: Are you willing to spend more if it's a branded product?

Table 5 indicates the responses to the question are you willing to spend more if it's a branded product? The respondents were asked the question and then given the following choices of response: Yes I will, No, Maybe, and Other.
n the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds, nearly half of the respondents -14 out of 30 - responded Yes I will. 13 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered Yes I will, while 13 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Yes I will.
12 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered No. 6 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds answered No, while 4 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered No.
3 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered Maybe. 10 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered Maybe, while 9 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Maybe.
Overwhelmingly, the respondents in the age categories represented by 18 to 30 year olds, 31 to 45 year olds and 46 to 60 year olds asserted that they would be willing to spend more money for a brand name fast food product.
The results of the survey responses to this question indicate that the fast food consumers in London reflected in this survey are far more likely to forgo cost savings in order to choose a global fast food brand name product. These results further indicate the consumer perception of the quality and superiority of the global fast food brand name over its competitors. Again, these results were consistent across all three age groups.


Table 6. Survey Question: What is the maximum amount you are willing to spend on branded fast food restaurant (Per Person) in current economic environment?
Table 6 indicates the responses to the question what is the maximum amount you are willing to spend on branded fast food restaurant (Per Person) in current economic environment? The respondents were asked the question and then given the following choices of response: 0 to 5 pounds, 5 to 10 pounds, 10 to 15 pounds, and 15 to 20 pounds.
 
n the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds, nearly half of the respondents -12 out of 30 - responded Oto 5 pounds. 18 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered Oto 5 pounds, while 16 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Oto 5 pounds. 10 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered 5 to 10 pounds.
7 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered 5 to 10 pounds, while 7 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered 5 to 10 pounds.
7 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered 10 to 15 pounds. 4 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered 10 to 15 pounds, while 6 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered 10 to 15 pounds.
Finally, 1 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered 15 to 20 pounds. 1 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered 15 to 20 pounds, while 1 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered 15 to 20 pounds.
These results indicate that the fast food consumers reflected in this survey are willing to spend upwards of 10 pounds on a fast food meal from a global brand name in the recovering economic environment.


Table 7. Survey Question: Will you be willing to change your regular restaurant in case of a price increase?

Table 7 indicates the responses to the question will you be willing to change your regular restaurant in case of a price increase?
The respondents were asked the question and then given the following choices of response: Yes I will, No, Not sure, and other.

n the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds, a small number - 8 out of 30 - responded Yes I will. 9 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered Yes I will, while 13 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Yes I will.
17 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered No. 16 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered No, while 11 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered No. 2 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered Not sure.
3 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered Not sure, while 3 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Not sure. Finally, 3 of the 30 respondents in each age category answered Other.
These results overwhelmingly indicate that the fast food consumers reflected in this survey are brand loyal; they are not willing to change the brand of restaurant that they have become attached to, and they are willing to spend more money to stay with the brand of restaurant that they have become attached to, even in the recovering economic environment.
 
 

Table 8. Survey Question: Will you be willing to switch from your branded restaurant to a normal restaurant if they offer higher quality food?
Table 8 indicates the responses to the question will you be willing to switch from your branded restaurant to a normal restaurant if they offer higher quality food? The respondents were asked the question and then given the following choices of response: Yes I will, No, Maybe, and Other.
n the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds, a small number - 9 out of 30 - responded Yes I will. 16 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered Yes I will, while 15 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Yes I will.
14 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered No. 6 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered No, while 4 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered No.
5 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered Maybe. 7 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered Maybe, while 8 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Maybe.
Finally, 4 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered Other. 1 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered Other, while 3 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Other.
These results indicate that the quality of the fast food that the consumers reflected in this survey eat remains more important among the older age groups, which may indicate an increased concern with health based on age.


Table 9. Survey Question: Do marketing and promotion campaigns change your image about other brands?

Table 9 indicates the responses to the question do marketing and promotion campaigns change your image about other brands? The respondents were asked the question and then given the following choices of response: Yes, No, Sometimes, and other. In the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds, nearly 50 percent of the respondents -12 out of 30 - responded Yes.
 
9 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered Yes, while 11 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Yes.
14 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered No. 12 of the 30 respondents in the age category represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered No, while 12 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered No.
3 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered Sometimes. 7 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered Sometimes, while 6 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Sometimes.
Finally, 1 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 18 to 30 year olds answered Other. 3 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 31 to 45 year olds also answered Other, while 5 of the 30 respondents in the age group represented by 46 to 60 year olds also answered Other. These results overwhelmingly indicate that the fast food consumers reflected in this survey are brand loyal.
Nearly 50 percent of the respondents surveyed remain unaffected by the marketing and promotional efforts of the competitors of their brand of choice.
They are not willing to change the brand of restaurant that they have become attached to, regardless of the promotion, and they actively seek to remain loyal to the global fast food restaurant brand of restaurant that they have become attached to, even in the recovering economic environment.

Secondary Data
The researcher compiled information from the Greater London Authority's report Spending Time: London's Leisure Economy, an overview of the various players located in the city of London in the product category of eating out, take out foods, and fast
foods. The documents collected from the Greater London Authority provide valuable insight into the dining out market of the city of London in the 21st century.

London represents one of Britain's largest dining out markets. According to the Greater London Authority (2005), the city of London houses 6,128 licensed restaurants; this figure represents an astonishing 22 per cent of all of the restaurants located in the United Kingdom.
The Greater London Authority (2005) estimates that in 2002, the total amount of revenue generated by dining out and take out or eat-in fast food restaurants in Britain was approximately £15.5 billion.
Market calculations compiled by the Greater London Authority Economics demonstrate that the demand for traditional restaurants generates £5 billion, while fast food restaurants earn £3 billion annually (Greater London Authority, 2005). An additional £1.75 billion in revenue is generated by fast food take out service and drive thrus (Greater London Authority, 2005).
Overall, the fast food industry represents a total value to the London economy of £1.43 billion. Over £0.9 billion is from eat-in restaurants and over £0.5 billion is fast food takeaway. (Greater London Authority, 2005).
The main competitors of the fast food industry, other than fast food brands that occupy the same product category, include ethnic restaurants, casual dining establishments, coffee shops, cafes, and pubs (Greater London Authority, 2005).
The ethnic restaurants in the greater London area have been appraised at a value of £3 billion (Greater London Authority, 2005). Coffee shops and cafes located in the city have also been assessed at a value of nearly £2.7 billion (Greater London Authority, 2005).
According to the Greater London Authority (2005), these figures conceal certain transformations in dining out market, particularly in relation to fast food. Burger chains and global fast food brands burgers represent 11 per cent of the total eating out market; however, growth is deemed sluggish (Greater London Authority, 2005).
In contrast, the areas of growth in the dining out market include "restaurant pubs and gastro pubs with 9 per cent of the market, and pizza and pasta restaurants with 5 per cent" (Greater London Authority, 2005, p. 31).
Within the eating out market in the city of London, many different players compete for market share. As the Greater London Authority (2005) explains, "while small, privately run enterprises make up the majority of the market, large multiple operators are shaping the dining culture of Britain.
 
Sixty-eight per cent of the dining market consists of independent operators. Restaurants and cafes are a market that independent entrepreneurs can readily enter" (p. 31).
However, independent operators that lack the brand equity of global fast food firms often struggle to compete effectively and generate consistent clientele (Greater London Authority, 2005). This phenomenon has been witnessed extensively since the beginning of the recession, although independent operators still produce market gains in lunch traffic and takeout food services. As the Greater London Authority (2005) notes:
Independents are strong at the low end of the market in sandwich bars and takeaways, and the mid-market of white tablecloth' restaurants. Ethnic restaurants are characterised by independents and family businesses, although a few multi-outlet chains have emerged in London. Independent operators are being squeezed by the growth of chains, especially in the mid market and the coffee shop and cafe market (p. 31).
According to the Greater London Authority (2005), many of the global fast food brands featured in this study are "growing through ownership and franchise" (p. 31). This is especially true of fast food firms that have built much of their brand equity on the strength of their franchises such as Subway and Domino's Pizza.
The fast food market in the city of London is dominated by "large companies and their familiar brands" (Greater London Authority, 2005, p. 31). The landscape of fast food in London remains largely the province of the global fast food brands that originate in the United States. As the Greater London Authority (2005) explains:
The burger market is led by McDonalds which has around 1,200 outlets in Britain and over 200 in London. Burger King has 700 outlets nationwide and almost 100 in London.
Other recognisable fast food brands have a large presence in London, such as KFC and Pizza Hut which each have over 80 outlets in London. Chains are shaping the mid-market for restaurants, illustrated by Italian-style outlets such as Ask and Pizza Express" (p. 31).
In the dining out market in London, the area of greatest recognisable growth occurs in the coffee market, particularly in the proliferation of coffee shop chains such as Starbucks. "There is intense competition between hundreds of coffee shops on the high streets of central London.
Starbucks is the leading chain with over 100 outlets in London. Costa Coffee and Pret a Manger have up to 90 outlets" (Greater London Authority, 2005, p. 31). Coffee chains at the present time do not compete directly with fast food establishments.

Top Six Fast Food Brands in the U.K.
In 2011, the annual revenue of the QSR industry in the U.K. amounted to over 5 billion pounds (IBIS World, 2011). The quick service restaurant sector in the U.K. houses over 27,000 competitors and employs over 166,000 people (IBIS World, 2011).

Subway
Fred De Luca and Peter Buck founded the privately held Subway, also known as Doctor's Associates, in 1966 in Bridgeport, Connecticut, USA (Doctor's Associates Inc., 2010; Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010; Haymarket Business Publications, 2009).
At that time, the chain was called Pete's Super Submarines; De Luca and Buck changed the name to Doctor's Associates, Inc. (DAI) when the second Subway store opened (Doctor's Associates Inc., 2005; Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010).
From then on, Subway has grown to become one of the largest franchise outfits in the world; as of March, 2011, the company operates 34,187 stores in 95 countries and territories worldwide (Doctor's Associates Inc., 2005; Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010).
Subway's franchise model underpins much of the company's success. As Simms (2011) notes, Subway's "franchise model allows rapid expansion with low risk to the parent company. If the franchisee succeeds, so does the parent company.
If they fail, the company just moves on" (n. pag.). Subway is now recognized as the top single brand global QSR chain; after Yum! Brands, the Subway restaurant chain is the largest global restaurant outfit (Charles, 2008; Doctor's Associates Inc., 2005; Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010).
 
The company's headquarters are located in Milford, Connecticut; five international centres oversee its global operations (Doctor's Associates Inc., 2005; Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010).
The London Subway franchises are supported by the regional office located in Amsterdam, Netherlands, which also looks after all of the European franchises (Doctor's Associates Inc., 2005; Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010).
Subway boasts an aggressive and rapid expansion mandate. According to Simms (2011), "in 2002, Subway announced plans to open 2,000 outlets in the UK and Ireland by 2010. So far it has made it to 1,507, but claims to be opening new outlets at the rate of five every week" (n. pag.).
The Subway restaurant chain earns $15.2 billion in revenue every year (Doctor's Associates Inc., 2005; Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010; Haymarket Business Publications, 2010). In 2011, Subway was named to the top 10 of Entrepreneur Magazine's top 10 in Franchise 500 list and boasts an innovative celebrity endorsement marketing platform (Close Up Media, 2011; Daley, 2011).
McDonald's
McDonald's represents one of the world's first "borderless" QSR multinational corporations (Technology Strategies, 1996, p. 19). In the QSR industry, McDonald's is the global stalwart. The first McDonald's appeared in London in 1974 (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010).
In terms of global business operations, including assorted franchisees as well as McDonald's Restaurants Ltd., the McDonald's Corporation takes the top spot in international QSR profits (Euromonitor International, 2010; Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010). According to Euromonitor International (2010), the McDonald's Corporation continues to be the "number one player within fast food" (n.pag.)
The company accounted for a 16 percent share of fast food sales in 2010, although compared to 2009 the share increase was minimal (Euromonitor International, 2010). According to Euromonitor International (2010), "after rationalising its outlet portfolio in 2009, the company opened only one new unit in 2010.
McDonald's appeared more focused on establishing its credentials as a socially responsible company and improving its menu offerings in 2010. The company has a long list of breakfast offers, including pancakes and syrup, bagels, bacon, sausage and Oatso Simple porridge. Its latest menu offering includes wraps" (n. pag.).
McDonald's long history of operations begins in 1948 in San Bernadino, California, USA (Walkup, 2007).

McDonald's has been credited with the creation of the fast food industry as we now know it; the company "created its own supply chain, especially for its major ingredients, because of its enormous needs," and has trail blazed a number of areas which QSR industries continue to thrive in today (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010; Walkup, 2007).
The company spearheaded much of the growth experienced in the QSR sector, and the company "gradually made changes that were innovations in the industry.
For instance, it made its first public stock offering in 1965, developed the Big Mac in 1967, opened its first McDonald's Playland in 1971, debuted in Hong Kong in 1975, added breakfast in 1977, launched its first national Happy Meal promotion in 1979 and added Chicken McNuggets in 1983" (Walkup, 2007, p. 27)
From a brand perspective, McDonald's is one of the oldest and also the most robust brands on the planet, one that seems impervious to controversy and criticism. "For many people, McDonald's represents the epitome of corporate globalization. Yet McDonald's did not invent globalization. Where McDonald's has been successful has been in making an already strong brand even stronger through the globalization process.
There are many businesses which would describe themselves as global or multinational. But truly global consumer brands are few and far between...
Truly borderless companies combine transferable management practices and culture with a set of brand attributes which are recognized by customers wherever the company does business" (Technology Strategies, 1996, p. 19). In 2010, the McDonald's corporation earned $1,908.90 million in sales and employed 37,644 people in the U.K. (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010).
Domino's Pizza
 
Domino's Pizza UK and IRL PLC (DOM) operates the Domino's Pizza franchise in the U.K. as well as the Republic of Ireland (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010). The first Domino's Pizza opened in London in 1999, and the company earns
$306.40 million in sales annually (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010).

Similar to the success of Subway, the Domino's Pizza franchise model remains a sound growth engine for the brand. As Kuhn (2009) notes, "the Domino's and Subway franchise model has allowed them to be pretty recession proof, and many individual businessmen have found them to be sturdy investments" (n. pag.).
Thomas and James Monaghan created the Domino's Pizza Inc. company in 1960; the company went public in 2004, and has been traded on the NYSE ever since (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010). According to the Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles (2010), "Domino's Pizza has been one of the top pizza delivery companies in the United States, selling over 1 million pizzas a day.
In addition to its pizza delivery business, Domino's Pizza maintains and operates a network of company-owned and franchise­ owned stores. The company operates within three business segments: domestic stores, domestic supply chain and international" (n. pag.).
The company's international division oversees the 3,726 franchise stores that operate outside of the U.S., including the London stores (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010).
Headquartered in Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA, the Domino's Pizza menu contains standard Italian American fare such as pizza, and pasta; specialty entrees and sides include "pasta bread bowls...oven-baked sandwiches...chicken side dishes, breadsticks and salads, as well as beverages and desserts" (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010).
According to IBIS World (2011), the "average revenue per each Domino's store was...about £670,000 in 2009, although 68 stores achieved annual revenue in excess of £1.0 million" (n. pag.) According to Kuhn (2009), Domino's Pizza increased its earnings portfolio "by a whopping 50 percent" in 2009 in the U.K. (n. pag.).

YUM! Brands
YUM! Brands Inc. earns $11,343.00 million in sales annually and employs 378, 000 people in the U.K. The YUM! Brands moniker represents the umbrella term for a group of quick service restaurants that the company operates worldwide, including the "KFC, Pizza Hut, Taco Bell, Long John Silver's, and A&W All-American Food Restaurants brands" (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010, n. pag.).
According to Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles (2010), YUM! Brands operates in a host of quick service categories, including "chicken, pizza, Mexican-style food, and quick-service seafood categories" (n. pag.). In December 2009, YUM! Brands officially owned and operated over 37,000 restaurants in 110 nations and territories worldwide (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010).
YUM! Brands, Inc. was founded in 1997 in Louisville, Kentucky, USA; at that time, the company was known as TRICON Global Restaurants, Inc. (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010). The company rebranded to YUM! Brands in May of 2002; it is now traded on the NYSE. YUM! Brands aggressively expands in both the European and Asian markets (Kuhn, 2010).
In June of 2010, the company relaunched Taco Bell in the U.K., following a failed attempt 30 years ago. As Kuhn (2010) explains, YUM! Brands "first tried to establish Taco Bell in the UK in the late 1980s when it had three sites in London and one in Birmingham. However, the restaurants were closed by the mid-1990s" (n.pag.).
Taco Bell is YUM! Brands' most successful firm in the United States; the company believes there is a market for Mexican food in the U.K. as well (Kuhn, 2010). In early 2011, YUM!
Brands announced that it would be selling off two of its businesses - Long John Silver's, a quick service seafood chain, and A&W brands, a burger chain, in order to concentrate on its core money makers - KFC, Pizza Hut and Taco Bell (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010; Kuhn, 2010).

Eat Ltd
Privately owned Eat Ltd. was founded in 1996 in London by Faith MacArthur and Niall MacArthur and has grown to include 100 stores as of 2011 (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010; Kuhn, 2009). The company's annual sales surpassed
$2,234.40 million pounds in 2010 and the company employs 1,512 people in London (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010; Kuhn, 2009).
 
Eat Ltd. specializes in sandwiches, soups, baked goods, salads, wraps, sushi, and breakfast offerings such as porridge and muffins, and markets its products as "healthy fast food" (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010; Kuhn, 2009).
Kuhn (2009) reported that Eat Ltd. boosted its portfolio earnings by 36.4 percent in 2009, and attributes the continued success of the chain to the fact that "Britons are also shunning posh business lunches and choosing instead to head to Eat or Pret a Manger for a sandwich" (n. pag.).

Pret a Manger
Pret a Manger is a sandwich shop based in London. Founders Julian Metcalfe and Sinclair Beecham established the chain in 1986 in London and in 2010, the company earned $453.80 million pounds in revenue (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010; The Telegraph, 2008).
The founders sold Pret a Manger in 2008 for 350 million pounds to Bridgepoint, a private equity company based in the UK, and Goldman Sachs in the United States (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010; The Telegraph, 2008).
Pret a Manger specializes in freshly made sandwiches, soups, and sushi (Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles, 2010; The Telegraph, 2008). It also operates a service that distributes all of the food that it does not sell to the homeless individuals living in London (The Telegraph, 2008). The sandwich chain boosted its earnings portfolio by 29.7 percent in 2009 (Kuhn, 2009).

Impact of the Recession
Overall, household expenditure on eating out has decreased by 13.2 percent in the U.K. since 2006 (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011). Since 2007, according to research compiled by IBIS World (2011) and Euromonitor International (2010), two market research firms located in London, the U.K. QSR industry has been in decline.
In the years between 2007 and 2011, IBIS World (2011) documented a decline in QSR industry revenue. The decline in QSR revenue has been attributed to "subdued growth in demand and fierce price-based competition on menu items between industry operators.
The recent global economic downturn has caused falls in real household disposable income, particularly as the unemployment rate remains at or above 8.0 percent" (IBIS World, 2011, n. pag).
According to IBIS World (2011), QSR industry revenue fell at a rate of 2.9 percent annually between the years 2007 and 2011, to a projected total of 4.8 billion pounds in the year 2012.
Forecasters anticipate that the QSR industry revenue will grow very little in 2011 in the U.K. - only 0.1 percent (IBIS World, 2011). Forecasters characterize the flat line growth as normal, "given the prevailing economic uncertainty and low consumer sentiment" in the U.K. (IBIS World, 2011, n. pag.)
QSR operators noted a shift in consumer behaviour in the U.K. as a result of the recession (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011; Euromonitor International, 2010; IBIS World, 2011). Accordingly, market researchers describe a "polarisation within fast food, with some operators continuing to offer less expensive meals while others provide healthier food menus" (Euromonitor International, 2010, n. pag.).
The multinational franchise and chain stores such as McDonald's, Domino's Pizza, YUM! Brands, and Subway conduct business at the far end of the fast food offerings spectrum, while a significant number of smaller, locally owned and operated outfits operate at the other end.
Thus, as IBIS World (2011) notes, while large franchise stores make up a smaller share of the QSR industry firms - about 20 percent - they nonetheless "account for about 60 percent of industry revenue and 66 percent of total employment.
These establishments typically have a greater number of staff per establishment, with Domino's averaging about 33 people per location in its UK operations, and each franchisor usually owns about 4.5 stores" (n. pag.). In 2010, the sale of fast food items by QSR firms London increased by 2 percent in "current value terms" (Euromonitor International, 2010, n. pag.; Woods, 2011).
Competition within the sector has not diminished as a result of the recession (Consumers International, 2009; Consumer Reports, 2011; Euromonitor International, 2010; IBIS World, 2011). Rather, the nature of competition between the brands has changed.
 
As a growing number of fresh and healthy fast food chain outfits such as Eat Ltd., Pret A Manger, and additional Subway franchises come into the London QSR market, fast food stalwarts such as McDonald's offer more health conscious meals while simultaneously marketing value meals aggressively (Euromonitor International, 2010; IBIS World, 2011).
As Euromonitor International (2010) notes, "McDonald's continued to offer a £1.99 meal while other players, such as Pret a Manger and Eat Ltd., offered healthier calorie marked meals" (n. pag.).
In the period coming out of the recession, 2011 and 2012, Euromonitor International (2010) anticipates that the sales of fast food items will "continue to grow...by attracting both lunch time and breakfast crowds, [although] over the forecast period, fast food sales are expected to decline slightly in constant value terms" (n. pag.).

Economic Climate in the U.K.
The study revealed multiple discrepancies between the documents analysed in terms of consumer behaviour in the QSR sector, specifically in light of the recession. These discrepancies will be discussed in detail in the literature review section of the paper.
In the U.K., the measure of inflation - the Retail Price Index, or RPI - increased by 8.4 percent between the years 2006 and 2008, and then decreased by 0.5 percent between the years 2008 and 2009 (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011).
Since 2006, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2011) points to an overall increase in prices of 7.9 percent. In the average U.K. consumer household, changes in spending behaviour since 2006 have been noted as follows:
•	"household spending on food and drink up by 2.1%;

•	eating out spending down by 8.9%;

•	all alcoholic drinks spending down by 11.9%;

•	spend on alcoholic drinks bought outside the home down by 19.5%" (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011, p. 10).

In terms of regions within the U.K., disparities exist in terms of patronage to fast food and fast casual dining establishments. In London, the overall percentage of expenditure on restaurants and bars was the highest of all regions in the country at 35 percent (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011).
As the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2011) notes, the overall percentage of expenditure on restaurants and bars is "lowest in the West Midlands at 28 percent. In England as a whole, people spent 31 percent of all the money they spent on food and drink on eating out purchases.
The percentage of spending on alcoholic drinks outside the household is highest in London at 59 percent and lowest in the South East at 50 percent" (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011, p. 39).
While London consumers still comprise the largest market for fast food chains, the QSR customers are nonetheless responding to the recession by reducing the amount of discretionary income that they spend on restaurants and bars, "including reducing their total expenditure on take-away and fast foods" (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011, p. 9).
The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2011) published its revised report Family Food 2009 in May of 2011 and noted the following significant behavioural changes in the average U.K. consumer's discretionary spending - including those residing in London:
The amount of food eaten out is on a long term downward trend. Measured in grams, the amount of eating out was 15 percent lower in 2009 than in 2006.
In terms of money spent in actual prices...not adjusted for inflation...it was 1.8 percent lower at £11.33 per person per week for all food and alcoholic drinks. Food and non-alcoholic drinks spending was £8.26. There are downward trends in purchases of most categories of eating out food and drink since 2006.
The most significant reductions in amounts bought include confectionery down 20.4 percent, alcoholic drinks down 20.5 percent, crisps, nuts and snacks down 18.1 percent and soft drinks...including milk drinks...down 17.5 percent. There are no categories with a significant upward trend since 2006 (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011, p. 9)
 
In order to put the impact of the recession on consumer spending in perspective, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2011) offered the following insight: "in 1975 households spent the equivalent of £25.20 on household food and drink.
This is not directly comparable with the 2009 figure of £23.86 as it does not include spending on confectionery and soft drinks, and excludes Northern Ireland households.
It does show that spending in real terms is lower in 2009 than in 1975" (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011, p. 9).
These findings remain significant in terms of the QSR industry post-recession. What this means to the QSR brands in London is that consumers in London are spending less, thus competition between fast food chains will likely continue to be aggressive, as firms must compete for a smaller share of cash-strapped consumers' discretionary income.
Several events conspired to create the situation that faced the average U.K. fast food consumer in London between the years 2009 and 2011. The recession created six quarters of flat growth, from which the U.K. emerged officially, according to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2011), in the year 2009.
Food prices rose in general during that period also, according to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2011), due to "commodity price rises, fuel price rises and the weakening of sterling against the euro" (p. 9). Once the U.K. economy officially transitioned out of the 2009 recession, the last quarter of 2009 saw an increase in the pressure on discretionary spend.
As the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2011) notes, "the relative affordability of food can be monitored by the share of total household spending that goes on food purchases. In 2009, on average food and non-alcoholic drink accounted for 11.5 percent of all household spending.
The percentage of all household spending that goes on food and drink has been increasing since 2005 and 2006, when it was
10.2 percent. This indicates that food is now exerting greater pressure on the household budget" (p. 9).

As a rule, consumers in the U.K. have adjusted their spending behaviour since 2009 "by trading down to cheaper products, but not by buying significantly less.
Food groups where the reduction is due to a large drop in quantities purchased are bread, flour, fresh fruit and processed fruit and fruit products...Purchases of alcoholic drinks for household supplies decreased in 2008 but in 2009 increased 12.9 percent to return to 2007 levels" (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011, p. 9).
Another area that affects the bottom line of London's QSR brands is consumer confidence. According to Ryan (2011) "a gauge of Britons' assessment of their present situation fell 3 points to 18...[while) an index of shoppers' views on whether it's a good time to make a major purchase, such as a house or car, dropped 2 points to 75.
Data...showed unemployment jumped in the third quarter as the number of young people looking for work climbed above 1 million for the first time in at least 19 years" (n. pag).
Grim outlooks on the job front have persisted into 2011 (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011; Ryan, 2011). In the fall of 2011, the number of unemployment claims increased from "5,300 to 1.6 million" (Ryan, 2011, n.pag). Similarly, the rate of inflation in the fall of 2011 sat at 5 percent (Ryan, 2011).
While QSR firms have intensified the marketing of value meals, according to Ryan (2011), "pressures on household budgets have also intensified, with underlying wage growth running at less than half the rate of inflation and the jobs market showing renewed signs of weakness" (n. pag).
That said, Ryan (2011) notes further discrepancies in consumer spending behaviour, as sales continued to bring in shoppers in 2011, despite the sluggish economy, gloomy forecasts, and high unemployment rates.
However, as Ryan (2011) cautions, although "sales defied forecasts as shops lured cash-strapped consumers with discounts, the gains may not last, as Britons struggle to shake off strains from labour market slack, above target inflation and the biggest fiscal squeeze since World War II.
The data suggest that demand on the high street has continued to grow, despite the current intensity of the fiscal and inflation squeezes on consumers...overall real consumer spending is likely to continue to fall sharply for some time to come" (n. pag).
 
The continued economic instability witnessed in London will more than likely exaggerate the competition amongst the QSR chains and the locally owned and operated fast food establishments. As Euromonitor International (2010) notes, QSR firms "initially benefited from increasingly busy consumers having less to spend eating out.
But other types of food service outlets are also identifying the reasons for more consumers visiting fast food units, and they are looking to counter with price discounting and promotions" (n. pag.). This increased competition will likely create a decrease in the constant value sales of the QSR sector over the course of 2012 (Euromonitor International, 2010).
The researcher set out to determine the impact of these combined economic factors, as well as the continued instability of the euro and the European debt crisis, on QSR brands in London.
Discussion
In recent years, an increased interest in the development and management of brand equity as one of the principal drivers of a QSR chain's financial success has become apparent in the brand management literature. Successful brand management occurs when QSR firms comprehend the value of brand equity and successfully leverage it to produce optimal operational and financial performance.
Brand management in the QSR industry entails managing an ongoing relationship with the consumer; in light of the recession in the U.K., additional pressure to maintain that relationship now exists, as well as additional competition for less discretionary income.
This study analysed the work of other researchers, as well as global brand surveys and statistical documents between the years of 2009 and 2011, and examined them in light of the research questions.
The goal of the research and investigation of these documents was to determine what other researchers had learned about the consumer behaviour of QSR customers in London, and to ascertain the impact of the recession on these buying choices.
Studies and surveys that examined the impact of brand name, brand equity, brand recognition, brand loyalty, brand awareness and brand engagement on consumer choices were chosen, as were documents that noted the increase or decrease of brand value and consumer response to promotional campaigns such as value meals.
The literature review also contains several studies that detailed the impact of fast food on health, particularly as obesity rates in the U.K. have been climbing in recent years, which the healthy food lobby attributes to increased consumption of high calorie fast food meals.
Finally, the literature review looks at studies that attempt to understand the London based consumer outlook on American brands, and whether or not this has an impact on their buying behavior when making food choices.
As a rule, the study determined that brand awareness and brand equity remained the two most significant factors that affected fast food customers in London as they made their food choices. Brand awareness typically leads time-starved consumers to choose a recognizable brand such as McDonald's or Subway over an unrecognized or lesser known brand in the same product category.
An additional factor was cost: low cost meals and value meals boosted sales for many firms. However, lower priced value meals in competing firms did not necessarily draw consumers away from the brand they had engaged with - this demonstrated brand equity in action.
The study determined that low price affects some consumer decisions; however, on its own the literature examined did not support the idea that a lower priced meal at a competitor firm was enough to draw the brand engaged consumer away from his or her brand of choice. Thus while fast food customers in London might compare their regular restaurant with its competitive firms, a price war will not necessarily win their business.
Fast food firms do acquire competitive advantage as a result of their brand name, as brand awareness creates the secure value proposition that many consumers in the midst of the recession sought.
The marketing and promotion campaigns that QSR fast food firms undertook during the period examined did display some success at attracting customers from competitive brands, particularly in the case of the McDonald's McCafe co-branding strategy and the Subway $5 Footlong Promotion.
 
Brand name and brand engagement remain two of the most valuable assets a QSR firm can have in the competitive QSR landscape.
For many QSR firms, the power of the brand name and the strength of what the brand means to consumers will tip the balance in favour of the brand over its competitors, even in a cash-strapped consumer environment. Thus, effective brand management adds value to the firm and strengthens its competitive edge.
While simply speaking a brand is the name or logo associated with a particular product, brand management actually refers to the consumer experience of the product, and as a result requires time to develop.
As Holt (2004) explains, "although a product has a name, a trademarked logo, unique packaging, and perhaps other unique design features...the brand does not yet truly exist. Names, logos, and designs are the material markers of the brand.
Because the product does not yet have a history, however, these markers are empty. They are devoid of meaning	The
difference is that these markers have been filled customer experiences	Over time, ideas about the product accumulate and fill
the brand markers with meaning. A brand is formed" (p. 3).

The vast majority of successful QSR chains contain familiar brand attributes that remain constant through each incarnation of the brand and through all of its franchisees. Examples include the familiar yellow decor of the inside of a Subway restaurant, the McDonald's Happy Meal, and the blue uniforms that all Domino's Pizza employees the world over wear.
The visual markers of the brand support the emotional and psychological experience that the consumer has with the brand; these markers also underpin the consumer's investment in the brand. In the highly competitive QSR industry, a powerful brand remains "critical to the success of [fast] food service firms because strong brands often provide the primary points of differentiation between various competitors.
Strong brands aid customers in better visualizing and understanding intangible products and services. Furthermore, they reduce customers' perceived monetary, social, or safety risks in buying services, which are difficult to evaluate before purchase" (Kim and Kim, 2004, p. 116).
Robust brands that can withstand market hills and valleys tend to be created when the company goes after individuality in executing and broadcasting the value proposition it has to offer consumers (Holt, 2004; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004).
Effective brands communicate their uniqueness, establish emotional bonds with their customers, continually characterize, reiterate, and profit from the consumer's elevated perception of the QSR chain's performance, and promote buy-in from employees (Holt, 2004; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004).
In the QSR arena, a robust brand with powerful and resilient brand equity supplies the company with several important benefits (Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Riezebos et al., 2003; Verma, 2009).
These include enhanced consumer loyalty, diminished susceptibility to the shocks of the market and of competitor marketing tactics, increased profits, a higher likelihood of a positive consumer reaction to price increases, greater effectiveness in promotional communications, and a greater likelihood that the brand will extend into other categories (Holt, 2004; Keller, 2001; Keller, 1993; Kim and Kim, 2004).
As Kim and Kim (2004) note, brand effectiveness and extension opportunities remain key goals for QSR brands. Like other brands, QSR chains seek to develop powerhouse brands, yet the nature of the QSR chain industry is such that the achievement of that goal can be challenging, and price wars have proven ineffective and damaging to the industry as a whole. As Kim and Kim (2004) explain:
Given that many QSR chains' products and services are not inherently differentiated and the channels of distribution are not distinctive, customers often have only price and brand equity to differentiate one brand from its competitors. In the absence of strong brands, the only remaining ongoing marketing mechanism is price manipulations, usually in the form of discounting.
Indeed, the QSR industry has heavily relied on price promotions as an important marketing activity. That emphasis has resulted in continual price wars that have damaged customer loyalty and reduced revenue (p. 116).
The study endeavoured to understand the influence that brand awareness, brand equity, brand attitudes and brand engagement has upon consumers in London when making food choices, specifically in the QSR sector.
 
This study revealed that while cost certainly plays a role in that decision, particularly in recent years during the U.K.'s economic downturn, brand engagement continues to exert a powerful effect on London QSR consumers. The decision to buy repeatedly from a particular QSR brand and not another stems from a complex emotional and psychological relationship that successful QSR firms cultivate over many years with their customers.

Summary
Chapter Four contains the primary and secondary research and findings. This chapter contains three subsections: a brief overview of the top six fast food restaurant chains in London, the impact of the 2008-2009 recessions on the fast food industry in London, and the economic climate that the U.K. has faced since the 2008-2009 recession, particularly in light of the struggling euro and the European debt crisis.
Conclusions
The results of this research supported the researcher's hypothesis that evidence of brand allegiance would be available through close analysis of both the primary research and the secondary research compiled for the study.
The study participants overwhelmingly demonstrated a preference for their particular fast food brand of choice; the participants also showed a predilection for large global brands such as Subway and McDonald's, and these preferences demonstrated a significant impact on their purchasing decisions.
The large majority of fast food consumers will demonstrate varying perceptions of global brands, from indifference to full brand engagement.
The results of this study support the findings of other studies that suggest that in the product category of fast foods, global brands appear to possess some supplementary psychological and emotional associations exclusive to the brand, associations which local or unrecognized brands do not demonstrate.
The phenomenon of brand loyalty evidence in this study and similar studies demonstrates the competitive advantage that fast food firms with robust brand equity enjoy, even during one of the worst economic downturns to hit the globe since the Second World War.
Thus, this has significant contributions to brand image and knowledge, and it enhances brand value which is likely to affect consumers' brand selection and loyalty behavior
One of the most significant features of this study that the researcher discovered via the consumer survey was the prevalence of consumer perception that global brands remain of higher quality than local brands or unknown brands.
A vast majority of the participants of the fast food consumer survey agreed that there is a significant increase in the quality of the fast food products produced by global brands such as Subway and McDonald's.
The reasons for this perception, as given by the respondents, were a nearly unilateral belief that the food is better at a global brand fast food restaurant than the same food at an unrecognized fast food restaurant, and the belief that the quality of the customer service at global brand fast food restaurants is superior to that of unrecognized or local fast food restaurant brands.
These sentiments, as shared with the researcher through the respondents, echoes the core definitions of brand equity. The results clearly demonstrate brand loyalty, even in the face of higher prices, as nearly half of all the respondents in all age groups answered yes to the question would you be willing to spend more for a branded fast food product?
Jacoby and Chesnut (1978) defined brand loyalty as "the biased behavioral response expressed over time, by some decision making unit with respect to one or more alternative brands which is a function of psychological processes" (p. 36).
Essentially, a consumer who has become attached to a certain brand will choose the brand above competitors for reasons other than economic ones - typically as a response to an emotional or psychological need that the brand name fulfils.
In the case of the fast food consumer who has engaged with a particular brand, he or she will not accept substitutes within the same category, regardless of promotions, lower cost, availability, or even as this study demonstrates, armed with the knowledge of the caloric load that his or her fast food meal of choice contains.
Thus, a brand loyal fast food patron will demonstrate a positive attitude towards his or her brand of choice and this preference will affect the consumer's purchase decision process.
 
The brand loyal consumer will choose a given fast food brand over a competitor brand, and the allegiance and favouritism shown toward this brand in preference over other brands will have an indefinite quality.
As such, the brand loyal patron may remain loyal to his or fast food brand for the duration of his or her life and demonstrate fundamental fidelity to that brand over the long term (Apaydin, 2011; Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Jacoby and Chesnut, 1978; Keller, 1993; Keller, 2001; Lee, 2011).
The above factors must be present in the consumer purchasing decision making process in order for actual brand loyalty to exist. The definition put forth by Jacoby and Chesnut (1978) underscores the influence that the consumer's attachment to his or her fast food brand of choice will exact on his or her purchasing decisions and fast food restaurant choices.
Examining global brand loyalty and global brand buying behaviour and consumer purchasing decision processes needs to be understood in terms of the "principle of the covariance of attitudinal and behavioral loyalty" (Apaydin, 2011, p. 28).
In addition, brand engagement, brand loyalty and brand attachment contain both behavioural and affective elements that research must factor in to any interpretation of results (Apaydin, 2011).
Brand loyalty per se, can withstand economic threats to its existence, as evidenced by the results of this study, as well as numerous others (Apaydin, 2011; Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Jacoby and Chesnut, 1978; Keller, 1993; Keller, 2001; Lee, 2011).
In the fast food restaurant industry, brands and brand names are increasingly seen as providing a key insight into differentiation, as well as a distinct competitive advantage in the market place for fast food firms, an advantage that can be leveraged and maintained over many years and even decades (Apaydin, 2011; Keller, 2001; Lee, 2011).
A number of studies, several of which appeared in the literature review of this research, demonstrate the power of brand equity and brand loyalty as an influence on the consumer purchasing decision process.
In the fast food restaurant industry, brand equity and brand loyalty affects consumer purchasing decisions in multiple areas including price, choice of menu, location, and the variable health concerns represented by a meal from a fast food brand of choice versus a local or unknown competitor fast food brand.
The trend of globalization which began in the mid-1980s has been responsible for the unprecedented growth of a number of the fast food chains featured in this study, most notably McDonald's, YUM! Brands, Domino's Pizza, and Subway. The impact of globalization exacts unparalleled changes on the methods that major brands employ in their marketing campaigns and in the marketing of their consumer fast food products.
A number of large global brands that began in Western and developed nations have been reached unprecedented numbers of customers as a result of the concomitant developments in technology, media and consumer mobility (Lee, 2011). As a result of globalisation, global fast food brands such as McDonald's, Subway and Domino's Pizza have effectively created a homogenous global culture rooted in consumerism.
This culture expands across borders and across languages and gives rise to a global consumer society firmly oriented toward global brands (Apaydin, 2011; Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Lee, 2011; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002).
A number of the fast food firms featured in this study originate in developed countries such as the United States.

These firms have developed a globally integrated marketing strategy; their brand name enjoys global brand recognition, and attracts brand ambassadors from every corner of the globe (Apaydin, 2011; Austin, Mattila and Siguaw, 1999; Lee, 2011; Kim and Kim, 2004; Parsa and Kwansa, 2002). A robust brand name and strong brand equity allows fast food firms to benefit from a number of advantages. As Lee (2011) notes:
Basic scale economies of longer production series of identical packaging, one-brand communication spillovers, and worldwide media purchases mean lower costs and increased productivity. Therefore...it is vital to explore and understand the behaviors of consumers towards global brands and their perception of global brands. To be able to create loyal global consumers, gaining an insight of global consumer behavior is necessary (p. 26).
The researcher found significant differences to exist between the surveys reviewed as part of the secondary data and the survey conducted as part of the primary data.
 
The reason for this may lie in the fact that many of the surveys reviewed for the secondary data component took place during the final days of the recession in 2009 and during the recovery period in 2010, while the survey conducted for the primary research component took place in 2011, a time when economists predict that the United Kingdom is beginning to emerge from the global downturn of 2008 and 2009.
Economists anticipate the growth rate to increase in the year 2012. According to Flanders (2011), while the economic news is anything but rosy, the figures are beginning to demonstrate upward momentum when compared to the recession:
The Office for National Statistics...revised up our quarterly growth rate in the three months to September by exactly that amount. Pedants will point out that the figure for the previous quarter was revised down, by 0.1%- meaning we are pretty much exactly where we thought we were.
And the current account deficit hit a record £15.2bn, or an alarming 4% of GDP. However, we know these trade figures jump about a lot from quarter to quarter. The average current account gap for the first three quarters - at 2.7% of GDP - is below the 3.1% of GDP for the same period in 2010 (n.p.).

Research Questions

1.	What do the fast food customers in London think of fast food restaurants, and how important is a brand name to them when making food choices?
2.	Do fast food customers in London really care about brand name, or do they select it due to the low price?

3.	How do the fast food customers in London compare their regular restaurant with its competitive firms?

4.	Do fast food firms acquire any form of a competitive advantage due to their brand name?

5.	To what extent do marketing and promotion campaigns attract people from competitive brands?

The researcher analysed the results from the primary research consumer survey as well as the documents analysed in the secondary component of the research in order to provide answers to the study's guiding parameters.
Based on these interpretations, the researchers concluded that fast food customers in London do think of fast food restaurants when making food choices, and the brand name of the fast food restaurant does remain an important influencing factor on both their choice of restaurant, their food choices, and their purchasing behaviour.
While fast food customers in London did appear to be affected by the global economic downturn, their loyalty to their brand name fast food restaurant did not waver; rather, the respondents overwhelmingly agreed that they would spend more money in order to remain loyal to the fast food brand name to which they had become attached.
Low price did not appear to be a significant enough incentive to draw brand loyal patrons away to a fast food competitor. In addition the fast food customers in London do not appear to compare their regular restaurant with its competitive firms; rather, the marketing and promotion efforts of competitive brands fall largely short of their goals to poach brand loyal patrons.
Lastly, the results of the consumer survey indicate that fast food firms acquire an absolute rock solid form of competitive advantage due to the power of their brand name and the strength of their brand equity.
The researcher concluded that brand equity serves as a guarantee of patronage and a major source of revenue for the global fast food brand names featured in this study, including Subway, Domino's Pizza, McDonald's and YUM! Brands.

Recommendations for Further Research
Based on the researcher's experience while conducting this research study into the effect of brand names on consumer purchase decision making in the fast food product category in London, a few recommendations came to light. The main recommendation suggested would be to conduct the same study using a significantly larger sample of participants.
While the sample should remain random, future researchers may also wish to include details about the sample that may influence both brand loyalty and purchasing behaviour in addition to the age of the respondents, such as gender, socio­ economic status, country of origin, profession, education, religion, and race.
 
Summary
Chapter Five contains the study conclusions reached by the researcher. This chapter also contains a reiteration of the research questions in light of the primary and secondary data. This chapter also offers some recommendations for future research.
References
Apaydin, F. (2011). Exploring buying behavior across several product categories from branding perspective. International Business and Management 3(1), 26-33. Full-text. Academic One File.
Austin, J. R., A. Mattila and J.A. Siguaw (1999). The brand-personality scale: An application for restaurants. Cornell Hotel &
Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 40(3), 48-55. Full-text. Academic One File.

Bassett, M. T. et al. (2007). Purchasing behavior and calorie information at fast-food chains in New York City. American Journal of Public Health, 98 (8), 1457-1459.
Bentley, R. J., A. M. Kavanagh and L. E. Thornton (2009). Fast food purchasing and access to fast food restaurants: A multilevel analysis of VicLANES. The International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 6(28), 28-38. Full-text. Academic One File.
Bowen, G. A. (2009). Document analysis as a qualitative research method. Qualitative Research Journal, 9(2), 27-41. Full-text. Academic One File.
Buchholz, T. G. (2003). Burger, fries and lawyers: The beef behind obesity lawsuits. U.S. Chamber of Commerce, U.S. Chamber Institute for Legal Reform. Web.
Chan, K. et al. (2007). Attitudes towards American brands and Brand America. Place Branding and Public Diplomacy, 3 (3), 205-
212. Full-text. Academic One File.

Charles, G. (2008). Subway adds Reggae Reggae-branded spicy sub. Marketing, 2 July 2008, pp. 03. Full-text. Academic One File.
Charmaz, K. (2011). Grounded theory methods in social justice research. In N. Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln (eds). The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research, 4th edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Close Up Media (2011). Subway sandwich artist receives title of Miss Wales 2011. Food & Beverage Close-Up, 14 November 2011
n. pag. Full-text [online]. Business and Company Resource Center.

Consumer Reports (2011). Four big names lose. Consumer Reports Magazine, 2011. Web.

Consumers International (2009). Fried and tested: An examination of the marketing of fast food to children. Consumers International, 2009. Web.
Corbin, J. and A. Strauss (2008). Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory,
3rd edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Daley, J. (2011). The top 10 franchises. Entrepreneur, 11(1), p. 80-87. Full-text. Business and Company Resource Center.

De Bres, K. (2005). Burgers for Britain: A cultural geography of McDonald's UK. Journal of Cultural Geography, 22(2), 115-139. Full-text. Academic One File.
De Pelsmacker, P. and N. Dens (2010). Consumer response to different advertising appeals for new products: The moderating influence of branding strategy and product category involvement. Journal of Brand Management 18 (1), 50-65. Full-text.
Academic One File.

De Vaus, D. (2001). Research Design in Social Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Denzin, N. and Y. S. Lincoln (2011). Introduction: The discipline and practice of qualitative research. In N. Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln (eds). The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research, 4th edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Denzin, N. K. (1970). The Research Act: A Theoretical Introduction to Sociological Methods. New York: Aldine. Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2011). Family Food 2009. London: U.K. National Statistics Authority.
 
DiPietro, R. B. (2005). The case against multibranding strategy. Cornell Hotel & Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 46 (1), 96-
99. Full-text [online]. Academic One File.

Dixon, L. B., B. Eibel and M. K. Vadiveloo (2011). Consumer purchasing patterns in response to calorie labeling legislation in New York City. The International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 8(51), 51-60. Full-text. Academic One File.
Doctor's Associates Inc. (2005). Subway company history. International Directory of Company Histories, Vol. 67. Full-text. Academic One File.
Doctor's Associates Inc. (2010). Subway restaurants. International Directory of Company Histories, Vol. 67. Full-text. Academic One File.
Enz, C. A. (2005). Multibranding strategy: The case of Yum! Brands. Cornell Hotel & Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 46(1), 85-89. Full-text. Academic One File.
Euromonitor International (2010). Country Report: Fast Food in the United Kingdom. London: Euromonitor International. Web.

Fereday, J. and E. Muir-Cochrane (2006). Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis: A hybrid approach of inductive and deductive coding and theme development. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 5(1), 80-92.
Finlay, L. and B. Gough (2003). Reflexivity: A Practical Guide for Researchers in Health and Social Sciences. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Flanders, S. (2011). Reasons to be cheerful- part three. BBC News, Business. Web.

Frazer, L. et al. (2007). McCafe: the McDonald's co-branding experience. Journal of Brand Management, 14(6), 442-458. Full­ text [online]. Academic OneFile.
Fullerton, J. A. (2005). Why do they hate us? International attitudes towards America, American brands and advertising. Place Branding [online], 1(20), 129-140. Web.
Fullerton, J. A. et al. (2007). Attitudes toward American brands and brand America. Place Branding and Public Diplomacy, 3(3), 205-212.
Fullerton, J., A. Kendrick and 0. Randolph (2010). International attitudes toward America. Place Branding and Public Diplomacy,
6(3), 244-255. Full-text [online]. Academic OneFile.

Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles (2010). Domino's Pizza. Full-text [online). Business and Company Resource Center. Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles (2010). Eat Ltd. Full-text [online). Business and Company Resource Center.
Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles (2010). McDonald's Restaurants Ltd. Full-text [online). Business and Company Resource Center.
Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles (2010). Pret a Manger. Full-text [online). Business and Company Resource Center.

Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles (2010). Subway Restaurants. Full-text [online). Business and Company Resource Center.
Gale Cengage Learning Company Profiles (2010). YUM! Brands. Full-text [online). Business and Company Resource Center.

Gammoh, B. S., R. Skiver and K. E. Voss (2011). Consumer evaluation of continuous and discontinuous innovation: The effects of brand equity and product category knowledge. American Journal of Business, 26(1), 65-80. Full-text [online). Academic OneFile.
Gereffi, G., J. Lee and M. Christian (2009). US-based food and agricultural value chains and their relevance to healthy diets.
Journal of Hunger & Environmental Nutrition, 4(3-4), 357-374.

Glaser, B. G. and A. L. Strauss (1967). The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. Chicago: Aldine.

Glayzer, A. and J. Mitchell (2008). Ignorance is not bliss when eating out: The need for nutrition labelling at fast food and other chain restaurants. The Food Commission, December 2008. Web.
Greater London Authority (2005). Spending Time: London's Leisure Economy. London: Greater London Authority.
 
Haymarket Business Publications (2009). Subway to adopt fresh creative direction. Marketing, 16 September 2009, 8. Full-text. Academic One File.
Haymarket Business Publications (2010). Subway - Sideways. Campaign.

Heding, T. et al. (2009). Brand Management: Research, Theory and Practice. New York: Routledge. Heppner, P. P. et al. (2008). Research Design in Counseling, 3rd edition. Belmont, CA: Thomson.
Holt, D. B. (2004). How Brands become Icons: The Principles of Cultural Branding. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press. BIS World (2011). Take-Away, Fast Food Restaurants in the UK: Market Research Report. London: IBIS World. Web.
Jacoby, J. and R.W. Chestnut (1978). Brand Loyalty Measurement and Management. New York, NY: Wiley.

Kapferer, J. (1997). Strategic Brand Management: Creating and Sustaining Brand Equity Long Term. London: Kogan Page Publishers.
Kapferer, J. (2008). The New Strategic Brand Management: Creating And Sustaining Brand Equity Long Term. London: Kogan Page Publishers.
Kaplan, R. S. and D. P. Norton (2004). Strategy Maps: Converting Intangible Assets into Tangible Outcomes. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Keller, K. L. (1993). Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand equity. Journal of Marketing, 57(1), 1-22. Keller, K. L., (2001). Building customer-based brand equity. Marketing Management, 10(2), 15-19.
Keynote (2010). Young adults opt for fast food despite health concerns. 2010. Web.

Kim, H. and W. G. Kim (2004). Measuring customer-based restaurant brand equity: Investigating the relationship between brand equity and firms' performance. Cornell Hotel & Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 45(2), 115-131. Full-text. Academic One File.
Kuhn, K. (2009). Recession fuels 8% growth in UK fast-food industry. Caterer and Hotel Keeper, 2009. Web. Kuhn, K. (2010).  YUM! Brands to relaunch Taco Bell restaurant chain in UK. Caterer and Hotel Keeper, 2010. Web. Labuschagne, A. (2003). Qualitative research: Airy fairy or fundamental? The Qualitative Report, 8(1), 7-12.
Lee, S. (2011). Customer value proposition and service profit chain of the Chick-fil-A restaurant for enhancing customer experience. European Journal of Management 11(4), 117-122. Full-text. Academic One File.
Leone, R. P. and R. D. Raggio (2009). Postscript: Preserving (and growing) brand value in a downturn. Journal of Brand Management 17 (1), 84-89. Full-text [online). Academic OneFile.
McDonald, M. and I. Dunbar (2004). Market Segmentation: How to Do It, How to Profit from It. Oxford, U.K.: Elsevier Butterworth­ Heinemann.
Merriam, S. B. (1988). Case Study Research in Education: A Qualitative Approach. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. O'Leary, N. (2010). How Subway built a $4b brand, five bucks at a time. AdWeek, 51(34), 53-54.
Oches, S. (2011). Coming to London 2012: Mcd's biggest play program ever. QSR, 2011. Web.

Parsa, H. G. and F. A. Kwansa (2002). Quick Service Restaurants, Franchising, and Multi-Unit Chain Management. New York: Haworth Press.
Patterson, P. M., T. Richards and A. Tegene (2007). Obesity and nutrient consumption: A rational addiction? Contemporary Economic Policy, 25(3), 309-325. Full-text. Academic One File.
Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods, 2nd edition. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. Pradhan, S. (2009). Retailing Management: Texts and Cases. New Delhi: Tate McGraw Hill.
Ramasamy, B. and M. Yeung (2008). Brand value and firm performance nexus: Further empirical evidence. Journal of Brand Management 15(5), 322-335. Full-text [online]. Academic OneFile.
 
Rapley, T. (2007). Doing Conversation, Discourse and Document Analysis. London: Sage Publications.

Reynolds, J. (2011). Subway rolls out first fan-sourced offering. Marketing, 27 July 2011, 7. Full-text [online]. Academic OneFile.

Riezebos, et al., (2003). Brand Management: A Theoretical And Practical Approach. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Financial Times Prentice Hall.
Ritson, M. (2007). Mark Ritson on branding: In bed with McD's but still Innocent. Marketing, 16, 19-20. Full-text. Academic OneFile.
Roberts, K. (2004). Lovemarks: The Future Beyond Brands. New York: PowerHouse Books.

Ryan, J. (2011). U.K. consumer confidence drops to record low on Euro outlook. Bloomberg Businessweek, 2011. Web.

Schmitt, B. H. and L. Zarantonello (2010). Using the brand experience scale to profile consumers and predict consumer behaviour. Journal of Brand Management 17 (7), 532-540. Full-text. Academic One File.
Schumacher, S. and J. H. McMillan (1993). Research in Education: A Conceptual Introduction. New York: Harper Collins. Seddon, et al. (2008). Brandz Top 100 Most Valuable Global Brands 2008. Web.
Seddon, et al. (2009). Brandz Top 100 Most Valuable Global Brands 2009. Web. Seddon, et al. (2010). Brandz Top 100 Most Valuable Global Brands 2010. Web. Simms, A. (2011). How Subway tops the fast-food chain. Guardian. Web.
Simovic, M. (2010). Brand Equity: Consumer Based Brand Equity in Practice. Saarbrucken, Germany: VDM Publishing.

Strauss, A. and J. Corbin (1990). Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Technology Strategies (1996). Developing a truly international brand and company. International Journal of Physical Distribution
& Logistics Management, July 1996, 19-23. Full-text. Academic One File.

The Telegraph (2008). Pret a Manger founders sitting pretty. The Telegraph. Web.
 	 

Thomadsen, R. (2007). Product positioning and competition: The role of location in the fast food industry. Marketing Science,
26(6), 792-804. Full-text [online]. Academic OneFile.

Tybout, A. and T. Calkins (2005). Kellogg on Branding: The Marketing Faculty of the Kellogg School of Management. Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley and Sons.
Verma, R. (2009). Brand Management. New Delhi: Laxmi Publications.

Walkup, C. (2007). An overarching influence: McDonald's changed the way people thought about food and has remained a dominant trailblazer throughout its 51-year history. Nation's Restaurant News, 41(5), 26-28.
Watson, J. (2002). China's Big Mac attack. In: C. M. Counihan (ed) Food in the US: A Reader. New York: Routledge. 347-357.

Woods, C. (2011). Hospitality industry is worth £18.6b to London economy. Hospitality- Driving Local Economies. London: British Hospitality Association.
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 2nd edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Introduction
Leadership is a social process through which one person makes use of others’ support in accomplishing certain goals. A leader is a person who is moving towards a particular direction while managing to influence others to follow him or her. A leader becomes a coordinator, a commander, a manager, a counsellor, and an initiator in a group, country, or an organisation. Therefore, leadership depends on two key factors namely the leader’s ability to guide, direct, organise, and influence others and the readiness of followers to embrace or resist the leadership style applied.
Some of the leaders who depicted clear leadership styles during their tenure of the office include Nelson Mandela, Adolf Hitler, Julius Nyerere, Jomo Kenyatta, Benito Mussolini, Michael Gorbachev, and Mahatma Gandhi, John F. Kennedy, and Martin Luther. However, this paper focuses on the former leader and his leadership style. Specifically, the paper will give reasons as to why Nelson Mandela is a good leader. Further, the paper presents his leadership style in an effort to confirm that he is indeed an epitome of exemplary leaders.
Nelson Mandela as a Leader: Background Information
Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela is a renowned and influential leader who was born at Umtata in Transkei district of South Africa. Mandela was born on 18th July 1918. Mandela’s father, Gadla Henry Mphakanyiswa was a chief1. Mandela was brought up in close witness of leadership. Consequently, his parents and the Thembu people expected that Rolihlahla would also become a chief like his father. By being brought up in a chief’s family, Mandela would end up learning a lot on leadership. His mother Nosekeni Fanny was a long-serving Christian.
Since Mandela was a bright student, he proceeded to Fort Hare University. It is at the university that Mandela’s leadership traits began to emerge. Mandela would fight for equality of all students in college. He would later proceed to spearhead the fight for democracy in South Africa. As a result, he qualified as the first democratically elected president of the republic of South Africa. He later led the country for five years. Today, Mandela is esteemed as an example of an egalitarian leader.
Nelson Mandela Leadership Style
Why Was Nelson Mandela a Good Leader?
One of the reasons why Mandela was a good leader is that he did not tolerate unfairness, inequality, and oppression of the minority. For example, while Mandela was at Port Hare University, he realised that there was discrimination in the appointment of student representatives2. It is out of Mandela’s fight for democracy at the university that the authorities expelled him.
Mandela was perceived as being high hardened and stubborn. He believed that students from all races stood equal chances of being nominated as student representatives at the university. However, he was expelled before realising his dream. By having sacrificed his stay and further education at the university for the sake of democracy, one realises that Mandela was a good leader.
1 hour!
The minimum time our certified writers need to delivera 100% original paper
LEARN MORE
The Will to Fight for Democracy
Another indicator of good leadership qualities in Nelson Mandela is his determination to fight for democracy in his Thembu community3. When Mandela was in his twenties, his parents together with the community identified a bride for him, but he believed in democracy. Hence, he claimed freedom to choose a wife. Mandela’s action set precedence for many young men in Thembu community who fought for their rights to have a bride of their choice. This act is an indicator of good leadership.
Mandela’s Charismatic Leadership
Thirdly, after Mandela joined the African National Congress (ANC) in 1940s, he was able to bring together many educated and uneducated youths to form the ANC youth league. Moreover, Mandela was able to work with his fellow youth leaders like Walter Sisulu and Walter Tambo in ANC youth league in the effort of making it the most influential element of the party. The ability to bring together people from diverse backgrounds into the youth league indicates Mandela’s leadership abilities.
Fourthly, by 1947, Mandela’s charisma had convinced other leaders and the members of ANC youth league to elect him as the secretary of the youth league. This depicts Mandela as an influential and acceptable leader.
Fifthly, as Mandela continued with his political affairs and leadership at the ANC youth league, he was able to continue with his law degree studies at the University of South Africa where he later graduated. This indicates a leader who sought professional knowledge and skills in his pursuit of influence. Moreover, Mandela was later on elected the deputy president general of ANC in 1952. Promotion of Nelson Mandela into a senior party position further indicates that other leaders and party members had spotted his ability to spearhead the party’s affairs.
In addition, Mandela used his position as the deputy ANC party leader to spearhead defiance against the apartheid regime in South Africa4. For example, in 1952, Mandela organised and pulled all ANC members, leaders, and supporters to defy the apartheid regime by organising protests and defiance campaigns. In the same way, Mandela led indigenous Africans in 1952 to defy apartheid regime by boarding buses designated for the Europeans only. Courage is one of the attributes of a good leader.
Moreover, Mandela led the black Africans in defying the segregation rules of the ‘all-white’ parks5. In addition, after ANC was banned in 1960 following the Sharpeville massacre, Mandela led youths in forming, ‘the spear of the nation’ underground movement. The spear of the nation movement attacked and sabotaged major government facilities in South Africa. For example, they attacked railways, power, and telephone installations. These acts indicate that Mandela was a persistent and persevering leader who could not give up the fight until he and his followers achieved their goals.
Mandela & International Support
Another indicator that shows that Nelson Mandela was a good leader was his ability to sneak out of the country during the apartheid regime to visit various countries in order to solicit for support against colonialists. For example, in 1962, Mandela left South Africa to address the Pan-African Freedom Conference, which was being held in Ethiopia. In this conference, Mandela was able to solicit for all African heads of independent states to support his party and country against apartheid. Mandela then proceeded to London where he appealed to the Labour Party (one of the major political parties in Britain) to assist the ANC in fighting against the apartheid regime.
Remember! This is just a sample
You can get your custom paper by oneof our expert writers
GET CUSTOM ESSAY
Mandela’s thirst for knowledge and skills was also depicted during his visit to Algeria. During his visit to Algeria Mandela trained on guerrilla tactics under the Algerians nationalists who were then fighting the French. Mandela proceeded with his diplomatic appeals in Kenya and Tanzania where he was able to garner full support. The impact of Mandela’s visit to the international community was witnessed when most of the countries imposed sanctions on South Africa.
Committed, Sacrificial, and Servant Leadership
Mandela also indicated that he was a committed and dedicated leader during his term of imprisonment at the Robben Island. After Mandela left Kenya, he was arrested on August 5th 1962 where he was charged with leaving South Africa in an illegal way and for inciting South African workers to strike. Mandela was initially sentenced to a five-year imprisonment before he was later sentenced to life imprisonment after some statements alleged to be incitement statements were seized from the “spear of the nation’ offices at Rivonia house”.6
In addition, the statements that were seized from his fellow leaders further implicated Mandela. Mandela sacrificed his freedom for the freedom of his country. It was not until 1990 when de Klerk became the new president of South Africa that he released Mandela besides allowing the operation of political parties. Mandela became the president of ANC where he was elected the first black president of the independent republic of South Africa in 1994. Mandela had achieved his fight for freedom of his people. He further demonstrated tolerance in leadership after he emphasised a rainbow nation, a nation that comprised many races.
Contrary to the expectation of many people, Mandela was accommodative to the colonialists and his former oppressors7. It is out of his tolerance that the economy of the independent South Africa grew rapidly through the efforts of investors from all races. Surprisingly, Mandela supported the peace and reconciliation movement headed by Archbishop Desmond Tutu. This indicated Mandela’s democratic leadership style. His thirst for unity and equal rights also came out strongly during the reconciliation efforts in South Africa.
Mandela is also a convincing diplomat. His ability to influence Colonel Muammar Gaddafi to hand over the individual Lockerbie bombers of the Pan Am Airline to the International Criminal Court (ICC) in 1999 indicates his diplomatic ability. Colonel Gaddafi had completely refused to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in handling arrest cases and trial of the bombers. However, with the intervention of President Mandela, Colonel Gaddafi was able to cooperate with the ICC. This saved Libya from becoming a pariah state since it had already started receiving economic sanctions. Immediately after Mandela’s diplomatic mission succeeded, economic sanctions against South Africa were lifted.
Mandela further indicated his democratic leadership when he retired from the presidency and handed over power to the elected Thambo Mbeki, his former deputy president. The ANC party won the 1999 general elections. All these cases happened under the democratic eye of Nelson Mandela. The process of the election and the consequent handing over of power were said to be one of the most democratic processes in the world. This democracy still ringers in the minds of South Africans and the world. When he left office, and Mandela said, “I step down with a clear conscience, feeling that I have, in a small way, done my duty to my people and my country”8. This indicates his passion, dedication, and democratic nature.
Nelson Mandela Democratic Leadership Style
Leadership styles are leaders’ ways of offering directions, inspiring people, influencing them, and implementing any relevant plans. The leadership style that a leader adopts depends on his or her philosophy, character, and experience9. Different leaders depict different leadership styles in different situations. Leaders may also change their leadership styles depending on the situation of leadership10. The leadership style that a leader may chose should depend on the prevailing situation and followers. The most adopted leadership styles in the world include the engaging style, Laissez-faire style, autocratic style, narcissistic style, toxic style, task-oriented style, and democratic leadership style.
Although there were various leadership styles that Mandela depicted during his leadership years, only one leadership style features predominantly. The leadership style that Mandela commonly applied was democratic. Mandela depicted various facets of democratic style of leadership. Democracy is the rule of the people by the people and for the people. In a democratic style of leadership, the leader mostly shares the process of decision-making with people11. Therefore, decision-making depends on the followers since democratic style fully takes their interests in reading for their implementation process.
We will write
a custom essay
specifically for you
Get your first paper with
15% OFF
LEARN MORE
Social equality is also promoted in the participative leadership style. In a democratic leadership style, the leader is ready to share his or her position with other leaders. In addition, the leader openly listens to his or her juniors where he or she readily discusses with them on various issues of leadership. The leader becomes the implementer of the people’s opinions and ideas. Leaders who embrace democratic style of leadership become the people’s leaders12. They hold leadership on behalf of their followers. Nelson Mandela depicted various qualities of democratic leadership style.
Nelson Mandela indicated his initiative to help and guide others in his leadership. For example, while the University of Port Hare, Mandela rose against oppression of indigenous African students by the university administration. Mandela campaigned against discrimination of Africans in nomination of student representatives. Although Mandela was expelled from the university, he was able to help his fellow indigenous Africans at Port Hare University since the university’s administration later began nominating Africans as student representatives.
Mandela fought for democracy at the university in a non-violent way. He also used his democratic style of leadership after he was expelled from Port Hare University when Oliver Tambo, Walter Sisulu, and him formed the ANC youth league. Mandela was able to help South Africa in the fight against apartheid by organising and leading non-violent protests. Mandela also led peaceful protests against discrimination of the indigenous Africans by the whites in South Africa. Use of diplomatic methods of agitating for a larger democratic space in the country clearly depicts Mandela as a democratic leader. When Mandela was appointed the deputy president of ANC, he led the party in planning opposition against oppression. Mandela also helped many indigenous Africans who were arrested by the whites as a lawyer.
Nelson Mandela was a charismatic democrat. He used his democratic style to attract and win over loyal followers. For example, Mandela and his friends Sisulu and Tambo managed to form the ANC youth league. Mandela was also able to use the youth league to influence many indigenous Africans into following the activities of the movement13. In addition, his activities in the youth league earned him the deputy party leader’s position. Moreover, when ANC was banned from operating as a political party in South Africa, Mandela formed, “the spear of the nation” youth subversive lobby group. This movement attracted a large number of followers, with its activities disrupting the apartheid regime.
For example, the spear of the nation movement led indigenous Africans in defying segregation rules in buses and parks. When Mandela sneaked out of South African in 1962, he was able to influence many world leaders into supporting ANC and South Africa in its fight for freedom. For example, he marshalled support from the Pan-African freedom conference in Ethiopia and sought support from the labour party in the United Kingdom, Kenya, Algeria, and Tanzania. Mandela was also able to gain support from the United Nations. Although Mandela was jailed until 1991, his release attracted a large number of supporters who elected him as the first black president of South Africa. This achievement is an indicator of the strength of the democratic style of leadership.
Mandela’s democratic leadership style also came out through his efforts in seeking other people’s opinions especially on apartheid. For example, Nelson Mandela sneaked out of South Africa and travelled to many parts of the world to solicit for support against apartheid14. Mandela sought support from African leaders, the United Kingdom, Algeria, Kenya, and Tanzania. Mandela also sought the opinion of the United Nations on South Africa’s quest for freedom. He successively garnered support from these organisations, party, and countries. For instance, the United Nations imposed sanctions against South Africa. Algeria offered guerrilla-training skills to Nelson Mandela while other African nations provided financial and social support. When Nelson Mandela came out of the prison in 1991, he waited for the country to carry out a general election where he contested and won the presidential seat.
This was an act of democracy. Mandela only ruled for five years and retired. His dedication saw him hand over power in a peaceful manner to his deputy Thambo Mbeki who was also democratically elected. In addition, Mandela formed a rainbow nation slogan to accommodate people from all races including those who oppressed him. Mandela went ahead to form the national healing and reconciliation movement, which he supported15. The movement was aimed at reconciling all South Africans. Mandela’s fight for democracy and fulfilment of the majority will was also seen in his efforts to reconcile Libya with the rest of the world. Mandela prevailed upon Colonel Muamar Gaddafi until he handed over the bombers of Lockerbie Pan AM airline to the ICC. It is through the efforts of Nelson Mandela that Libya was saved from becoming a pariah state.
Nelson Mandela’s Communication Style
Communication is a major aspect of democratic style of leadership. Dialogue is a leading skill in which democratic style of leadership invests. In democratic leadership, the opinion, ideas, will, and views of other people are listened. The major aspect of democratic style of leadership is the will of the followers. Nelson Mandela relied on communication in his pursuit for leadership. For example, while he was at Port Hare University pursuing a degree in law, he rose against oppression of minority students.
Mandela used campaigns and advocacy in fighting for equality at the university. In this endeavour, Mandela organised and coordinated student groups who voiced their demand to the university’s administration. Mandela’s oratory and communication skills enabled him to influence students from the native Africans side and the whites’ side to fight for equality of student representatives. Dialogue with various student groups enabled Mandela’s voice to reach the administrators who later on expelled him from the university.
In addition, when Mandela was expelled from the university, he joined African National Congress. While working with the ANC party, Mandela took part in the formation of a youth wing. His persuasive communication skills enabled him to influence many young South Africans into the league. Both the ANC and its youth wing advocated for equality of all South Africans. The youth wing under the direction of Mandela was able to organise rebellion campaigns against apartheid16. Later, Mandela’s persuasive skills earned him the post of the deputy president of the Africa National Congress party. As the deputy leader of the party, Mandela spearheaded many discussions and dialogues with various party leaders in a bid to fight against apartheid.
Dialogue and communication skills also feature prominently when Mandela silently ran away from South Africa in order to seek the support of the international community in 1962. Mandela was able to communicate with his party leaders to influence them to finance his movement to various European and African countries to solicit for support against apartheid. Mandela addressed the Pan African Freedom Charter meeting in Ethiopia on matters of South Africa’s independence17. During this summit, Mandela used his communication skills to seek the opinion of other African leaders regarding the apartheid regime. His ability to chat and persuade others enabled him to marshal the support of the African leaders that attended the freedom charter meeting.
Communication that is purposeful and well packaged enables people to persuade others to move towards a particular direction. As Mandela moved to the United Kingdom to meet the labour party leaders, he was sure of the support of African leaders. Dialogue is a very powerful tool for ensuring that democracy is served. Mandela sought the will of the labour party concerning the apartheid regime in South Africa. In addition, Mandela was able to persuade the Labour Party and a considerable number of its followers to recommend for the abolishment of the apartheid regime. Before moving back to South Africa, Mandela visited Tanzania and Kenya. In these African countries, Mandela addressed various leaders and humanitarian organisations seeking their opinion on the prevailing segregation situation in South Africa. His communicative ability enabled him to earn the support of many leaders.
Mandela was able to communicate the bad situation at his home. He would use his communication skills and his knowledge as a lawyer to put forward a clear picture of the troubles of apartheid. Mandela also appealed to the international organisations such as the United Nations for support against the apartheid regime18. Mandela was very successful in his bid to solicit for support for the fight against apartheid. For example, the international community imposed economic sanctions against South Africa and its government. Imposition of sanctions against South Africa by the international community including the United Nations was an indicator of the success of Mandela’s pursuit for democracy. Mandela’s communication ability was also witnessed when he was released from jail in 1991. Mandela contested for presidency under his ANC party. Since Oliver Tambo, the party chairperson was still ill and in a foreign country, Mandela became the president of ANC. He was later on elected to the presidency using the ANC party ticket.
One of the key tools that great people such as leaders of states use when they need to settle any disputes is the use of dialogue. This strategy gives each party a chance to express its opinion as far as a certain issue is concerned. At the same time, other parties have the chance to listen and gauge the opinions delivered in the effort to air out theirs, which are also to be heard and gauged by other people. However, the key agenda that these parties seek is the neutral point when they will all agree on a certain way out so that the burning issue can be ended to pave way for progress.
Mandela was one of such leaders who upheld the role of dialogue in their leadership. The application of dialogue was also seen in the leadership of Mandela since he founded and supported the peace and reconciliation movement under the leadership of Archbishop Desmond Tutu19. The reconciliation movement used dialogue to bring various races and communities together. Contrary to the expectations of many whites in South Africa, Mandela advocated for a rainbow nation. He advocated for peace and reconciliation of all South Africans.
Democratic leadership style focuses its efforts on people. In a democratic leadership style, the leader holds his or her position on behalf of the people20. Leadership belongs to the people. To begin with, when Mandela was at Port Hare University, he was expelled due to his agitation for equality in the appointment of student representatives. He used his leadership skills to fight for the indigenous Africans at the university. Priority of student leadership at the university was accorded to the white students. It was for the predicament of the aboriginal Africans that Mandela was expelled from the university thereby dropping from his law class. The fight for democracy is sacrificial.
Democratic leaders sacrifice themselves for the sake of followers. Mandela also depicted his democratic leadership style during his early twenties when he refused to marry a bride that was identified and selected for him by his family. He believed that all people should be given the free will to choose their bridegroom. In addition, Mandela also suffered in prison for the sake of people. When he sneaked from South Africa in 1962 and came back, Mandela was arrested and imprisoned. Mandela was charged with sneaking out of the country illegally.
Later, he was charged with incitement to violence. Mandela suffered in prison for 26 years for the sake of his democracy. He sacrificed his time and freedom for the people of South Africa. In addition, when Mandela was released from prison and elected for the presidency, he only ruled for five years before handing over leadership to the people in a democratic way. This indicates his ability to sacrifice himself for the sake of people.
When Mandela handed over leadership to his deputy in 1999, it was an indication of how democracy can enhance a smooth transition in the country. Democratic leadership style enhances equality and accommodation of others. Although many people expected Nelson Mandela to remain in the presidency for many years owing to his many years of struggle for independence, Mandela announced his retirement only after ruling for five years21. Mandela gave people a chance to elect a president of their own through a democratic election.
Conclusion
In conclusion, a leader is a person who is moving in a particular direction while managing to convince others to follow him or her. A leader is a coordinator, a commander, a manager, a counsellor, and an initiator. One of the good leaders who are highly appreciated across the world for their leadership style and demeanour is the former president of South Africa, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela. Mandela is rated one of the best leaders in the world due to his dedication during the struggle and freedom in South Africa. Mandela exhibited leadership qualities such as being a good communicator, for instance, when he rose against discriminative appointment of student representatives at the university.
Mandela also depicted his ability to suffer for the sake of his people when he was expelled from the university and/or when he was imprisoned for 26 years. He also ruled the nation in a manner that united people of all races by seeking peace for the larger Africa. Mandela adopted democratic leadership style. Mandela depicted various characteristics of democratic leadership style. In fact, he offered help and guidance to others. He built trust in his followers, sought other people, nations, and organisations’ opinions by adopting communication as a key driver in his leadership.
Nelson Mandela Leadership Style FAQ
1.	What did Nelson Mandela fight for?
Nelson Mandela was a human rights activist, a political prisoner, and a president of South Africa. He fought against oppressive government and apartheid. Reaching racial equality and the right for minorities to take part in decision making were his key goals.
2.	What was Nelson Mandela leadership style?
Mandela is considered to be both a people-oriented and a task-oriented leader. He exhibited transformational leadership approach that causes change on individual and political levels. The reforms he proposed enjoyed the support of broad sections of the South African population.
3.	Was Nelson Mandela a democratic leader?
After spending 27 years in prison, Nelson Mandela was elected president of South Africa in a representative democratic election. He interacted with the population and civil society, which supported the reforms he proposed.
4.	What qualities made Nelson Mandela a good leader?
The key qualities of Mandela were purposefulness, openness to communication, and the desire to help people.
Bibliography
Avolio, J, J Sosik, I Jung & Y Berson, ‘Leadership models, methods, and applications’, Industrial and organisational psychology, vol. 12, no. 1, 2003, pp. 277–307.
Latona, C, ‘Leadership Styles and Productivity: A Review and Comparative Analysis’, Training & Development Journal, vol. 26, no. 8, 1972, p. 2.
Le Amanda, C, E Jones, L Toth, M Charnison, D Grabarek, D Raben, ‘Mandela: The Rebel Who Led His Nation to Freedom’, School Library Journal, vol. 51, no. 10, 2005, pp.190-190.
O’Fallon, S, ‘Nelson Mandela and Unitive Leadership’, Integral Leadership Review, vol. 12, no. 4, 2012, pp.1-20.
Introduction
Leadership is a social process through which one person makes use of others’ support in accomplishing certain goals. A leader is a person who is moving towards a particular direction while managing to influence others to follow him or her. A leader becomes a coordinator, a commander, a manager, a counsellor, and an initiator in a group, country, or an organisation. Therefore, leadership depends on two key factors namely the leader’s ability to guide, direct, organise, and influence others and the readiness of followers to embrace or resist the leadership style applied.
Some of the leaders who depicted clear leadership styles during their tenure of the office include Nelson Mandela, Adolf Hitler, Julius Nyerere, Jomo Kenyatta, Benito Mussolini, Michael Gorbachev, and Mahatma Gandhi, John F. Kennedy, and Martin Luther. However, this paper focuses on the former leader and his leadership style. Specifically, the paper will give reasons as to why Nelson Mandela is a good leader. Further, the paper presents his leadership style in an effort to confirm that he is indeed an epitome of exemplary leaders.
Nelson Mandela as a Leader: Background Information
Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela is a renowned and influential leader who was born at Umtata in Transkei district of South Africa. Mandela was born on 18th July 1918. Mandela’s father, Gadla Henry Mphakanyiswa was a chief1. Mandela was brought up in close witness of leadership. Consequently, his parents and the Thembu people expected that Rolihlahla would also become a chief like his father. By being brought up in a chief’s family, Mandela would end up learning a lot on leadership. His mother Nosekeni Fanny was a long-serving Christian.
Since Mandela was a bright student, he proceeded to Fort Hare University. It is at the university that Mandela’s leadership traits began to emerge. Mandela would fight for equality of all students in college. He would later proceed to spearhead the fight for democracy in South Africa. As a result, he qualified as the first democratically elected president of the republic of South Africa. He later led the country for five years. Today, Mandela is esteemed as an example of an egalitarian leader.
Nelson Mandela Leadership Style
Why Was Nelson Mandela a Good Leader?
One of the reasons why Mandela was a good leader is that he did not tolerate unfairness, inequality, and oppression of the minority. For example, while Mandela was at Port Hare University, he realised that there was discrimination in the appointment of student representatives2. It is out of Mandela’s fight for democracy at the university that the authorities expelled him.
Mandela was perceived as being high hardened and stubborn. He believed that students from all races stood equal chances of being nominated as student representatives at the university. However, he was expelled before realising his dream. By having sacrificed his stay and further education at the university for the sake of democracy, one realises that Mandela was a good leader.
1 hour!
The minimum time our certified writers need to delivera 100% original paper
LEARN MORE
The Will to Fight for Democracy
Another indicator of good leadership qualities in Nelson Mandela is his determination to fight for democracy in his Thembu community3. When Mandela was in his twenties, his parents together with the community identified a bride for him, but he believed in democracy. Hence, he claimed freedom to choose a wife. Mandela’s action set precedence for many young men in Thembu community who fought for their rights to have a bride of their choice. This act is an indicator of good leadership.
Mandela’s Charismatic Leadership
Thirdly, after Mandela joined the African National Congress (ANC) in 1940s, he was able to bring together many educated and uneducated youths to form the ANC youth league. Moreover, Mandela was able to work with his fellow youth leaders like Walter Sisulu and Walter Tambo in ANC youth league in the effort of making it the most influential element of the party. The ability to bring together people from diverse backgrounds into the youth league indicates Mandela’s leadership abilities.
Fourthly, by 1947, Mandela’s charisma had convinced other leaders and the members of ANC youth league to elect him as the secretary of the youth league. This depicts Mandela as an influential and acceptable leader.
Fifthly, as Mandela continued with his political affairs and leadership at the ANC youth league, he was able to continue with his law degree studies at the University of South Africa where he later graduated. This indicates a leader who sought professional knowledge and skills in his pursuit of influence. Moreover, Mandela was later on elected the deputy president general of ANC in 1952. Promotion of Nelson Mandela into a senior party position further indicates that other leaders and party members had spotted his ability to spearhead the party’s affairs.
In addition, Mandela used his position as the deputy ANC party leader to spearhead defiance against the apartheid regime in South Africa4. For example, in 1952, Mandela organised and pulled all ANC members, leaders, and supporters to defy the apartheid regime by organising protests and defiance campaigns. In the same way, Mandela led indigenous Africans in 1952 to defy apartheid regime by boarding buses designated for the Europeans only. Courage is one of the attributes of a good leader.
Moreover, Mandela led the black Africans in defying the segregation rules of the ‘all-white’ parks5. In addition, after ANC was banned in 1960 following the Sharpeville massacre, Mandela led youths in forming, ‘the spear of the nation’ underground movement. The spear of the nation movement attacked and sabotaged major government facilities in South Africa. For example, they attacked railways, power, and telephone installations. These acts indicate that Mandela was a persistent and persevering leader who could not give up the fight until he and his followers achieved their goals.
Mandela & International Support
Another indicator that shows that Nelson Mandela was a good leader was his ability to sneak out of the country during the apartheid regime to visit various countries in order to solicit for support against colonialists. For example, in 1962, Mandela left South Africa to address the Pan-African Freedom Conference, which was being held in Ethiopia. In this conference, Mandela was able to solicit for all African heads of independent states to support his party and country against apartheid. Mandela then proceeded to London where he appealed to the Labour Party (one of the major political parties in Britain) to assist the ANC in fighting against the apartheid regime.
Remember! This is just a sample
You can get your custom paper by oneof our expert writers
GET CUSTOM ESSAY
Mandela’s thirst for knowledge and skills was also depicted during his visit to Algeria. During his visit to Algeria Mandela trained on guerrilla tactics under the Algerians nationalists who were then fighting the French. Mandela proceeded with his diplomatic appeals in Kenya and Tanzania where he was able to garner full support. The impact of Mandela’s visit to the international community was witnessed when most of the countries imposed sanctions on South Africa.
Committed, Sacrificial, and Servant Leadership
Mandela also indicated that he was a committed and dedicated leader during his term of imprisonment at the Robben Island. After Mandela left Kenya, he was arrested on August 5th 1962 where he was charged with leaving South Africa in an illegal way and for inciting South African workers to strike. Mandela was initially sentenced to a five-year imprisonment before he was later sentenced to life imprisonment after some statements alleged to be incitement statements were seized from the “spear of the nation’ offices at Rivonia house”.6
In addition, the statements that were seized from his fellow leaders further implicated Mandela. Mandela sacrificed his freedom for the freedom of his country. It was not until 1990 when de Klerk became the new president of South Africa that he released Mandela besides allowing the operation of political parties. Mandela became the president of ANC where he was elected the first black president of the independent republic of South Africa in 1994. Mandela had achieved his fight for freedom of his people. He further demonstrated tolerance in leadership after he emphasised a rainbow nation, a nation that comprised many races.
Contrary to the expectation of many people, Mandela was accommodative to the colonialists and his former oppressors7. It is out of his tolerance that the economy of the independent South Africa grew rapidly through the efforts of investors from all races. Surprisingly, Mandela supported the peace and reconciliation movement headed by Archbishop Desmond Tutu. This indicated Mandela’s democratic leadership style. His thirst for unity and equal rights also came out strongly during the reconciliation efforts in South Africa.
Mandela is also a convincing diplomat. His ability to influence Colonel Muammar Gaddafi to hand over the individual Lockerbie bombers of the Pan Am Airline to the International Criminal Court (ICC) in 1999 indicates his diplomatic ability. Colonel Gaddafi had completely refused to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in handling arrest cases and trial of the bombers. However, with the intervention of President Mandela, Colonel Gaddafi was able to cooperate with the ICC. This saved Libya from becoming a pariah state since it had already started receiving economic sanctions. Immediately after Mandela’s diplomatic mission succeeded, economic sanctions against South Africa were lifted.
Mandela further indicated his democratic leadership when he retired from the presidency and handed over power to the elected Thambo Mbeki, his former deputy president. The ANC party won the 1999 general elections. All these cases happened under the democratic eye of Nelson Mandela. The process of the election and the consequent handing over of power were said to be one of the most democratic processes in the world. This democracy still ringers in the minds of South Africans and the world. When he left office, and Mandela said, “I step down with a clear conscience, feeling that I have, in a small way, done my duty to my people and my country”8. This indicates his passion, dedication, and democratic nature.
Nelson Mandela Democratic Leadership Style
Leadership styles are leaders’ ways of offering directions, inspiring people, influencing them, and implementing any relevant plans. The leadership style that a leader adopts depends on his or her philosophy, character, and experience9. Different leaders depict different leadership styles in different situations. Leaders may also change their leadership styles depending on the situation of leadership10. The leadership style that a leader may chose should depend on the prevailing situation and followers. The most adopted leadership styles in the world include the engaging style, Laissez-faire style, autocratic style, narcissistic style, toxic style, task-oriented style, and democratic leadership style.
Although there were various leadership styles that Mandela depicted during his leadership years, only one leadership style features predominantly. The leadership style that Mandela commonly applied was democratic. Mandela depicted various facets of democratic style of leadership. Democracy is the rule of the people by the people and for the people. In a democratic style of leadership, the leader mostly shares the process of decision-making with people11. Therefore, decision-making depends on the followers since democratic style fully takes their interests in reading for their implementation process.
We will write
a custom essay
specifically for you
Get your first paper with
15% OFF
LEARN MORE
Social equality is also promoted in the participative leadership style. In a democratic leadership style, the leader is ready to share his or her position with other leaders. In addition, the leader openly listens to his or her juniors where he or she readily discusses with them on various issues of leadership. The leader becomes the implementer of the people’s opinions and ideas. Leaders who embrace democratic style of leadership become the people’s leaders12. They hold leadership on behalf of their followers. Nelson Mandela depicted various qualities of democratic leadership style.
Nelson Mandela indicated his initiative to help and guide others in his leadership. For example, while the University of Port Hare, Mandela rose against oppression of indigenous African students by the university administration. Mandela campaigned against discrimination of Africans in nomination of student representatives. Although Mandela was expelled from the university, he was able to help his fellow indigenous Africans at Port Hare University since the university’s administration later began nominating Africans as student representatives.
Mandela fought for democracy at the university in a non-violent way. He also used his democratic style of leadership after he was expelled from Port Hare University when Oliver Tambo, Walter Sisulu, and him formed the ANC youth league. Mandela was able to help South Africa in the fight against apartheid by organising and leading non-violent protests. Mandela also led peaceful protests against discrimination of the indigenous Africans by the whites in South Africa. Use of diplomatic methods of agitating for a larger democratic space in the country clearly depicts Mandela as a democratic leader. When Mandela was appointed the deputy president of ANC, he led the party in planning opposition against oppression. Mandela also helped many indigenous Africans who were arrested by the whites as a lawyer.
Nelson Mandela was a charismatic democrat. He used his democratic style to attract and win over loyal followers. For example, Mandela and his friends Sisulu and Tambo managed to form the ANC youth league. Mandela was also able to use the youth league to influence many indigenous Africans into following the activities of the movement13. In addition, his activities in the youth league earned him the deputy party leader’s position. Moreover, when ANC was banned from operating as a political party in South Africa, Mandela formed, “the spear of the nation” youth subversive lobby group. This movement attracted a large number of followers, with its activities disrupting the apartheid regime.
For example, the spear of the nation movement led indigenous Africans in defying segregation rules in buses and parks. When Mandela sneaked out of South African in 1962, he was able to influence many world leaders into supporting ANC and South Africa in its fight for freedom. For example, he marshalled support from the Pan-African freedom conference in Ethiopia and sought support from the labour party in the United Kingdom, Kenya, Algeria, and Tanzania. Mandela was also able to gain support from the United Nations. Although Mandela was jailed until 1991, his release attracted a large number of supporters who elected him as the first black president of South Africa. This achievement is an indicator of the strength of the democratic style of leadership.
Mandela’s democratic leadership style also came out through his efforts in seeking other people’s opinions especially on apartheid. For example, Nelson Mandela sneaked out of South Africa and travelled to many parts of the world to solicit for support against apartheid14. Mandela sought support from African leaders, the United Kingdom, Algeria, Kenya, and Tanzania. Mandela also sought the opinion of the United Nations on South Africa’s quest for freedom. He successively garnered support from these organisations, party, and countries. For instance, the United Nations imposed sanctions against South Africa. Algeria offered guerrilla-training skills to Nelson Mandela while other African nations provided financial and social support. When Nelson Mandela came out of the prison in 1991, he waited for the country to carry out a general election where he contested and won the presidential seat.
This was an act of democracy. Mandela only ruled for five years and retired. His dedication saw him hand over power in a peaceful manner to his deputy Thambo Mbeki who was also democratically elected. In addition, Mandela formed a rainbow nation slogan to accommodate people from all races including those who oppressed him. Mandela went ahead to form the national healing and reconciliation movement, which he supported15. The movement was aimed at reconciling all South Africans. Mandela’s fight for democracy and fulfilment of the majority will was also seen in his efforts to reconcile Libya with the rest of the world. Mandela prevailed upon Colonel Muamar Gaddafi until he handed over the bombers of Lockerbie Pan AM airline to the ICC. It is through the efforts of Nelson Mandela that Libya was saved from becoming a pariah state.
Nelson Mandela’s Communication Style
Communication is a major aspect of democratic style of leadership. Dialogue is a leading skill in which democratic style of leadership invests. In democratic leadership, the opinion, ideas, will, and views of other people are listened. The major aspect of democratic style of leadership is the will of the followers. Nelson Mandela relied on communication in his pursuit for leadership. For example, while he was at Port Hare University pursuing a degree in law, he rose against oppression of minority students.
Mandela used campaigns and advocacy in fighting for equality at the university. In this endeavour, Mandela organised and coordinated student groups who voiced their demand to the university’s administration. Mandela’s oratory and communication skills enabled him to influence students from the native Africans side and the whites’ side to fight for equality of student representatives. Dialogue with various student groups enabled Mandela’s voice to reach the administrators who later on expelled him from the university.
In addition, when Mandela was expelled from the university, he joined African National Congress. While working with the ANC party, Mandela took part in the formation of a youth wing. His persuasive communication skills enabled him to influence many young South Africans into the league. Both the ANC and its youth wing advocated for equality of all South Africans. The youth wing under the direction of Mandela was able to organise rebellion campaigns against apartheid16. Later, Mandela’s persuasive skills earned him the post of the deputy president of the Africa National Congress party. As the deputy leader of the party, Mandela spearheaded many discussions and dialogues with various party leaders in a bid to fight against apartheid.
Dialogue and communication skills also feature prominently when Mandela silently ran away from South Africa in order to seek the support of the international community in 1962. Mandela was able to communicate with his party leaders to influence them to finance his movement to various European and African countries to solicit for support against apartheid. Mandela addressed the Pan African Freedom Charter meeting in Ethiopia on matters of South Africa’s independence17. During this summit, Mandela used his communication skills to seek the opinion of other African leaders regarding the apartheid regime. His ability to chat and persuade others enabled him to marshal the support of the African leaders that attended the freedom charter meeting.
Communication that is purposeful and well packaged enables people to persuade others to move towards a particular direction. As Mandela moved to the United Kingdom to meet the labour party leaders, he was sure of the support of African leaders. Dialogue is a very powerful tool for ensuring that democracy is served. Mandela sought the will of the labour party concerning the apartheid regime in South Africa. In addition, Mandela was able to persuade the Labour Party and a considerable number of its followers to recommend for the abolishment of the apartheid regime. Before moving back to South Africa, Mandela visited Tanzania and Kenya. In these African countries, Mandela addressed various leaders and humanitarian organisations seeking their opinion on the prevailing segregation situation in South Africa. His communicative ability enabled him to earn the support of many leaders.
Mandela was able to communicate the bad situation at his home. He would use his communication skills and his knowledge as a lawyer to put forward a clear picture of the troubles of apartheid. Mandela also appealed to the international organisations such as the United Nations for support against the apartheid regime18. Mandela was very successful in his bid to solicit for support for the fight against apartheid. For example, the international community imposed economic sanctions against South Africa and its government. Imposition of sanctions against South Africa by the international community including the United Nations was an indicator of the success of Mandela’s pursuit for democracy. Mandela’s communication ability was also witnessed when he was released from jail in 1991. Mandela contested for presidency under his ANC party. Since Oliver Tambo, the party chairperson was still ill and in a foreign country, Mandela became the president of ANC. He was later on elected to the presidency using the ANC party ticket.
One of the key tools that great people such as leaders of states use when they need to settle any disputes is the use of dialogue. This strategy gives each party a chance to express its opinion as far as a certain issue is concerned. At the same time, other parties have the chance to listen and gauge the opinions delivered in the effort to air out theirs, which are also to be heard and gauged by other people. However, the key agenda that these parties seek is the neutral point when they will all agree on a certain way out so that the burning issue can be ended to pave way for progress.
Mandela was one of such leaders who upheld the role of dialogue in their leadership. The application of dialogue was also seen in the leadership of Mandela since he founded and supported the peace and reconciliation movement under the leadership of Archbishop Desmond Tutu19. The reconciliation movement used dialogue to bring various races and communities together. Contrary to the expectations of many whites in South Africa, Mandela advocated for a rainbow nation. He advocated for peace and reconciliation of all South Africans.
Democratic leadership style focuses its efforts on people. In a democratic leadership style, the leader holds his or her position on behalf of the people20. Leadership belongs to the people. To begin with, when Mandela was at Port Hare University, he was expelled due to his agitation for equality in the appointment of student representatives. He used his leadership skills to fight for the indigenous Africans at the university. Priority of student leadership at the university was accorded to the white students. It was for the predicament of the aboriginal Africans that Mandela was expelled from the university thereby dropping from his law class. The fight for democracy is sacrificial.
Democratic leaders sacrifice themselves for the sake of followers. Mandela also depicted his democratic leadership style during his early twenties when he refused to marry a bride that was identified and selected for him by his family. He believed that all people should be given the free will to choose their bridegroom. In addition, Mandela also suffered in prison for the sake of people. When he sneaked from South Africa in 1962 and came back, Mandela was arrested and imprisoned. Mandela was charged with sneaking out of the country illegally.
Later, he was charged with incitement to violence. Mandela suffered in prison for 26 years for the sake of his democracy. He sacrificed his time and freedom for the people of South Africa. In addition, when Mandela was released from prison and elected for the presidency, he only ruled for five years before handing over leadership to the people in a democratic way. This indicates his ability to sacrifice himself for the sake of people.
When Mandela handed over leadership to his deputy in 1999, it was an indication of how democracy can enhance a smooth transition in the country. Democratic leadership style enhances equality and accommodation of others. Although many people expected Nelson Mandela to remain in the presidency for many years owing to his many years of struggle for independence, Mandela announced his retirement only after ruling for five years21. Mandela gave people a chance to elect a president of their own through a democratic election.
Conclusion
In conclusion, a leader is a person who is moving in a particular direction while managing to convince others to follow him or her. A leader is a coordinator, a commander, a manager, a counsellor, and an initiator. One of the good leaders who are highly appreciated across the world for their leadership style and demeanour is the former president of South Africa, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela. Mandela is rated one of the best leaders in the world due to his dedication during the struggle and freedom in South Africa. Mandela exhibited leadership qualities such as being a good communicator, for instance, when he rose against discriminative appointment of student representatives at the university.
Mandela also depicted his ability to suffer for the sake of his people when he was expelled from the university and/or when he was imprisoned for 26 years. He also ruled the nation in a manner that united people of all races by seeking peace for the larger Africa. Mandela adopted democratic leadership style. Mandela depicted various characteristics of democratic leadership style. In fact, he offered help and guidance to others. He built trust in his followers, sought other people, nations, and organisations’ opinions by adopting communication as a key driver in his leadership.
Nelson Mandela Leadership Style FAQ
1.	What did Nelson Mandela fight for?
Nelson Mandela was a human rights activist, a political prisoner, and a president of South Africa. He fought against oppressive government and apartheid. Reaching racial equality and the right for minorities to take part in decision making were his key goals.
2.	What was Nelson Mandela leadership style?
Mandela is considered to be both a people-oriented and a task-oriented leader. He exhibited transformational leadership approach that causes change on individual and political levels. The reforms he proposed enjoyed the support of broad sections of the South African population.
3.	Was Nelson Mandela a democratic leader?
After spending 27 years in prison, Nelson Mandela was elected president of South Africa in a representative democratic election. He interacted with the population and civil society, which supported the reforms he proposed.
4.	What qualities made Nelson Mandela a good leader?
The key qualities of Mandela were purposefulness, openness to communication, and the desire to help people.
Bibliography
Avolio, J, J Sosik, I Jung & Y Berson, ‘Leadership models, methods, and applications’, Industrial and organisational psychology, vol. 12, no. 1, 2003, pp. 277–307.
Latona, C, ‘Leadership Styles and Productivity: A Review and Comparative Analysis’, Training & Development Journal, vol. 26, no. 8, 1972, p. 2.
Le Amanda, C, E Jones, L Toth, M Charnison, D Grabarek, D Raben, ‘Mandela: The Rebel Who Led His Nation to Freedom’, School Library Journal, vol. 51, no. 10, 2005, pp.190-190.
O’Fallon, S, ‘Nelson Mandela and Unitive Leadership’, Integral Leadership Review, vol. 12, no. 4, 2012, pp.1-20.
Muhammad Areeb Kazmi
Dr. Irfan Muhammad 
Philosophical Hermeneutics
March 31, 2024
Habermas’s critical theory and his critique on scientism
Jürgen Habermas’s critical theory stands as a cornerstone in modern social and political philosophy. Habermas, a prominent figure of the Frankfurt school, challenged the uncritical acceptance of science as the sole source of legitimate knowledge. In this essay, we will explore what stood as the critical theory at Frankfurt school for philosophers before Habermas, and his critique on them, his critical theory. This essay also aims to delve into its foundational elements and then analyze his critique on scientism. Moreover, in order to better understand his critique on scientism, we will go beyond scientism and explore implications of how Habermas counters scientism, the role of critical reflection, dialogue, and Freud’s psychoanalysis in his critique.
It is important for us to study the predecessors of Habermas who worked on the critical theory at Frankfurt. As argued by Hans-Georg Gadamer, we cannot escape the history and prejudices which have been embedded into us by the tradition (Schmidt 142). Therefore we will briefly discuss the developments of critical theory before Habermas. The concept of critical theory has been ambiguous because it combines two meanings of the word Kritik in a productive way. We should bear in mind they were developed in the classical German philosophy. The first meaning stems from the Kantian program of transcendental philosophy, and it signifies the testing of legitimacy. On the other hand, the second meaning comes from the Young Hegelians’ attitude in the opposition of theory and practice, and it signifies negation. The Kritik, for Kant is to be the primeval act of testing of the validity claims of knowledge, free from prejudice, which has to be carried out only by the force of reason (Bubner et al. 42). While Kant spoke of Kritik as the high court of reason, Hegel’s doctrine of absolute spirit marked the end of this development. In agreement with philosophers like Horkheimer and Adorno, Habermas critiques Hegel’s project and flags it severely flawed. Since it asserts philosophy to be the actual science, Habermas argues that Hegel has blurred the relation between science and philosophy. Karl Marx succeeded Hegel and provided the guide to appropriating Hegel’s insights while demystifying them (Held 298). 
Marx comes with his methodology which pursues the scientific explanation of our given reality with a view to the future transformation of that reality (Bubner et al. 43). Habermas points out the difficulties of this methodology raises a question. What kind of theory is it that can accuse all philosophical and economic theories of ideologically masking reality, and which can still claim itself to have a theoretical status? It follows that if it is itself an ideology, then it will not be a science. But if it is a science, then it is not a Kritik (Bubner et al. 44). We will discuss Marx later, if time and space permits in the theory of knowledge. The critical turn in the theory happens with Horkheimer where the critical theory reflects on the interests which are posited by theory’s own measuring stick of rationality, such that the knowledge and interests coincide instead of diverging. Now, a new philosophical paradigm is to be established where firstly, Marx came up with the critique on political economy, aiming to free the humanity, as a science of economic laws and hence at least as ‘traditional as it is, a critical theory’ (Bubner et al. 45).
When it comes to Habermas, there is a fundamental shift in the situation of critical philosophy from merely the role of ‘fault-finding cultural critique and political column’ to the project of a systematic philosophy. We will observe later as Habermas suffers from the legacy of the ambiguous concept of Kritik in his attempt. The systematic framework that Habermas chooses to ground his work is in the philosophy of language instead of the idealist tradition of his predecessors of the analysis of consciousness. Referring to Horkheimer’s distinction between traditional and critical theory, Habermas presented his thesis in his inaugural lecture at Frankfurt. He makes it clear that sciences cannot be comprehended without the reference to the knowledge constitutive interests which govern them. According to Habermas, we should differentiate between the three forms, the empirical analytic sciences follow the technical knowledge-constitutive interest, the historical-hermeneutic sciences follow the practical interest in intersubjective understanding. Whereas the emancipatory sciences follow critical self-reflection (Bubner et al. 46). It can be observed that the third, new, category can be seen to contain the legacy of idealist philosophy which returns in the shape of two modern ‘quasi-sciences’, i.e., ideology critique and psychoanalysis. 
With their distinct, yet subtle, nature like that of psychoanalysis seeming to be a therapeutic Praxis dealing with psychic illness, Habermas would have to demonstrate that these two methods of elucidation of false consciousness are forms of science instead of being transcended from science. Habermas swiftly goes about this by illuminating the audience of how their special status is legitimated and why the other two sciences do not hinder us. Habermas says, “… What raises us out of nature is the only thing whose nature we can know: language…” (Bubner et al. 47) Habermas goes on to discuss the human interest in autonomy and responsibility and calls on that only in an emancipatory society, willing to free itself from the shackles of technocracy, will the communication be developed in a non-authoritarian manner. We see Habermas’s critique on Gadamer here who believes that we are a dialogue without taking into consideration, factors like power: “The ontological illusion of pure theory behind which knowledge-constitutive interests become invisible promotes the fiction that Socratic dialogue is possible everywhere and at any time…”  
Since every linguistic utterance receives its actual meaning in the to and fro of dialogue, the autonomy and responsibility of all participants is reaffirmed by every spoken sentence. We see the dream of the idealist philosophical tradition being fulfilled as the dialogue represents mutual recognition of participants as subjects with equal rights. We must also note what the philosophical theory traditionally has fallen prey to, that is the naïve belief of freedom which hinders the achievement of true freedom itself. Rudiger Bubner points out the problems in Habermas’s complex argument. Firstly, that language represents a rational principle, but it must fall back to an a priori ideal which is not identical to language as such (Bubner et al. 48). While it might be said that Habermas takes Kant’s doctrine of ‘fact of reason,’ language cannot be taken as a fact of reason since it is Habermas’s starting-point. Language, which is a given, will have its interpretation as a medium of free dialogue going back to an idea of rationality in the sense of intersubjective recognition. Therefore, in order to reach undistorted rationality in the linguistic medium of communication, we will have to presuppose a free society (Bubner et al. 49). 
Before discussing his critique on scientism, it is important to point out Habermas’s objections to the authoritative status of consensus through resources provided by the language in Gadamer’s dialogue (Edgar 85). Habermas also discusses the unequal power relations that might have altered or corrupted the linguistic and discursive resources that were provided by the tradition (Edgar 86). This is to realize that the language can be a medium of power and domination as well as understanding. He notes that an unequal power relation leads to a master slave debate instead of a free dialogue where the outcome has already been decided by the one holding more power (. However, Habermas is dealt with criticism as the danger of ideology lurks in another area where he does not suspect it. While the Socratic dialogues were means to gaining knowledge or freeing oneself from ignorance, they were not considered to be the the playing-field of an ideal society, something we can observe in the Platonic dialogue of Phaedo as Socrates prepares to drink the poison and meet the gods. The problem comes as dialogues in their linguistic forms can promote, both knowledge and sophistry, for logos alone are not sufficient for unconcealing the truth since they can be deceptive (Bubner et al. 51). Habermas realizes this shortcoming in one of his lectures and prepares to reckon with the possibility of an enlightenment which might just create false hopes and change nothing. We see that Wittgenstein gave an insight that the ‘plurality of possible language-games can be grouped together only in loose family likenesses’. Thus, the rich spectrum of human dialogue would not be limited to a single model of a scientific system of exact statements. The problem for Habermas comes when he essentially abandons the starting point of pragmatics of language by comprising the entire spectrum of practical communication in society into the model of seminar discussion in Humboldt’s sketches (Bubner 52).
For Habermas, the critical theory was an attempt to counter “scientism” (Edgar 56). Scientism refers to the idea that we no longer understand sciences as one form of knowledge, but rather science is the only form of knowledge and we identify knowledge with science. Habermas critiques the positivism which is deeply linked and synonymous to scientism. Although it started as an effort to critique ideology of religion, metaphysics, dogma, etc., it became a central element of technocratic consciousness and a key aspect of modern ideology. Thus epistemology as the critique of knowledge has been largely undermined for Habermas (Held 296). This meant that science could not be comprehended by philosophy, thus losing sight of the ‘significant role of the epistemic subject (the knower) and of reflection by the subject on their actions’ (Held 297). Habermas acknowledges the good intent that positivist philosophy initially had for the said reasons above as an effort to critique of ideology and science appeared to offer the road to salvation in the 18th and 19th centuries. However, on his account, scientific knowledge is certainly not sufficient for human freedom and emancipation despite being a necessary condition. We observe that Habermas believes that knowledge free of presupposition can mislead us, and follows Gadamer’s path of humans being linked with history and tradition as he examines positivism over the last one hundred years. He also believes in exploring certain questions and examining the works of men within the philosophy of science by which positivism can be brought to a point of ‘transcending its own limitations’ (Held 300). While studying Marx, Habermas notes that Marx took natural sciences as basic paradigm for knowledge while retaining important insights from the philosophy of reflection at the level of social theory. The main problem for Marx lied where he fails to recognize its implications for the epistemological and methodological status of his own work. Resultantly, Marx failed to differentiate between the logical status of the empirical analytic sciences and the sciences of humankind as critique which is crucial to the development of a science of human beings to Habermas (Held 299). 
Habermas also studies Mach for whom, facts are given in sensory experience. Mach considers the facts in sensory experience to be objectivistic as they ‘adequately describe reality as it is’, while Habermas points out them to be subjective in terms of individual observation reports (Held 301). Mach rules out the demand of criterion of facticity by ontologizing facts which make them given in experience, ruling subjectivism out as a priori. Habermas objects to this approach by pointing out that ‘how prior to all science can the doctrine of facts make statements about the object domain of science as such, if we only obtain information about the domain through science’ (Held 302). Habermas shows that the positivists trying to cling to a unified program of science could not ‘recognize that there are methodological procedures appropriate to understanding communicative interaction and intersubjectivity.’ The communication between a subject and an object, acting as a subject, and the communication between a subject and an object which cannot be so construed are of different natures. The latter being monologic while the former being dialogic in character (Held 303). In Knowledge and Human Interests, Habermas writes that Peirce was one of the first philosophers who realized the need to systematically reflect on science and to demarcate positivist approach in order to comprehend the logic of science and its relation to nature (Held 304) It should be noted that Habermas does not argue that it is never appropriate to study human subjects with the methods of a causal, nomological, science. The claim that he makes is that a science that is restricted by itself to this procedure would be incapable of understanding a complex, multi-faceted, social reality (Held 307). 
Habermas uses Freud's psychoanalytic theory as a prime model of a field that questions the dominance of scientific thinking. While Freud's research is based on observing and treating patients suffering from psychic illnesses, it also explores subjective experiences, unconscious wishes, and symbolic interpretations. Freud's psychoanalytic approach, focusing on interpretation and self-reflection, provides understanding of human psychology that goes beyond what can be learned through empirical observation alone. Although Freud mistook his work for knowledge-constitutive, natural sciences, Habermas argues only Freud and his psychoanalysis is the ‘tangible example’ of a science incorporating methodical self-reflection (Held 319). This has to do with the three levels being accomplished in the Freudian psychoanalysis. According to Habermas, Freud's approach to understanding human behavior goes beyond the confines of positivist science, acknowledging the influence of unconscious drives and repressed desires on individual and collective behavior and works beyond the procedures of hermeneutic science using interpretative framework as an emancipatory science (Held 320). He calls it depth hermeneutics for the main objective is to understand the subject and make them understand themselves under the deepest levels of human consciousness and awareness. Therefore, for Habermas, Freud’s psychoanalysis is concerned with the construction of interpretations as the interpreter goes from the basic level, the first interest, to the second, where he understands the patient through his experience. Finally, the third interest, comes into play as he tries to reconstruct the individual’s life histories with a therapeutic intent (Held 322). Thus, psychoanalysis shows us Versetehen, understanding, in action where the analyst and the analysand understand the subject together (Held 323). However, Habermas also criticizes certain aspects of Freudian psychoanalysis, particularly its tendency to pathologize non-normative behaviors. He argues that Freud's theory, while revolutionary in its time, may not fully account for the diversity of human experiences and the socio-historical contexts in which they occur. Nonetheless, Habermas transposes the model of the realm of social analysis and political practice (Held 323). The verification must come from the subject in hand reaching an understanding and reconstructing their life histories themselves to find their repressed desires and motives leading to their current state of affairs. In critical theory, the ultimate verification of the entire empirical-theoretical enterprise is dependent upon practice, i.e., the eradication of barriers to self-reflection and the overcoming of structures which support such barricades (Held 324). 
For Habermas, fostering critical self-reflection is crucial for challenging the hegemony of scientism and enriching our understanding of human experiences. By encouraging individuals to engage in dialogue, deliberation, and interpretation, critical reflection enables a more holistic approach to knowledge production that incorporates diverse perspectives and values. However, the relation between reflection and emancipation leads to some difficulties. It seems from Habermas’s formulation that self-consciousness, as in self-reflection, is the total concern of the process of emancipation. His critics were quick to criticize him for conflating reflection and practical engagement. As a result, Habermas clarifies his position that it was never his intention to conflate these phenomena and mentions that the practice of self-reflection is not a sufficient condition for the achievement of a real, material, freedom. The use of the word, reflection, itself is problematic as accepted by Habermas since it goes back to German Idealism, having two meanings. While it denotes conditions of potential abilities of a subject, it also denotes the reflection ‘upon unconsciously produced constraints to which a determinate subject succumbs in its process of self-reflection’ (Held 326). The concept of self-criticism or critical self-reflection is different since it ‘brings to consciousness those determinants of a self-formative process (Bildung) which ideologically determine a contemporary Praxis and conception of the world.’ Therefore, unlike rational reconstruction, self-criticism is directly linked with practice and is the mode of reflection which the analysand is encouraged to go in psychoanalysis (Held 327). It enables the examination of subjective interpretations, cultural standards, and historical backgrounds that influence human actions and social organizations. Additionally, engaging in critical reflection helps individuals develop self-awareness and independence, enabling them to question prevailing narratives and challenge oppressive systems, thus truly emancipating themselves as was in the case of Freud’s psychoanalysis.
While we have gone through Habermas’s critical theory and some of his critique on scientism and positivism, there has been a huge chunk of elements that I have missed for reasons of running behind the schedule. The reader might also face some gaps between the arguments and some ambiguity as some of the concepts have not been elaborated and analyzed in the optimal manner. However, we saw how important Habermas’s critical theory has been to not only the Frankfurt school, the world, but also to his critique of scientism. His emancipatory sciences have also led feminist scholars to engage with his work because it aligns with their pursuit of freedom. His critical theory enables us to engage critically with the challenges of the modern age by embracing self-criticism and working towards the emancipation in the public sphere to make grounds for meaningful dialogue not dominated by power and between subjects of equal rights. We can also gauge the implications of scientism for democracy and governance where not considering other forms of knowledge and interests might lead to inequality and unwanted consequences. 

Works Cited
Edgar, Andrew. The Philosophy of Habermas. Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, 2014. 
Held, David. Introduction to Critical Theory Horkheimer to Habermas. Wiley, 2013. 
Schmidt, Lawrence Kennedy. Understanding Hermeneutics. Taylor and Francis, 2016. 
Thompson, John B., et al. Habermas, Critical Debates. Macmillan, 1983. 
Taylor Alison Swift (born December 13, 1989) is an American singer-songwriter. Her reinventive artistry, distinctive songwriting and entrepreneurship have been widely publicized and influential.

Swift began professional songwriting at age 14. She signed with Big Machine Records in 2005 and achieved prominence as a country pop singer with the albums Taylor Swift (2006) and Fearless (2008). Their singles "Teardrops on My Guitar", "Love Story", and "You Belong with Me" were crossover successes on country and pop radio formats and brought Swift mainstream fame. She experimented with rock and electronic styles on her next albums, Speak Now (2010) and Red (2012), respectively, with the latter featuring her first Billboard Hot 100 number-one single, "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together". Swift recalibrated her image from country to pop with 1989 (2014), a synth-pop album containing the chart-topping songs "Shake It Off", "Blank Space", and "Bad Blood". Media scrutiny inspired the hip-hop-influenced Reputation (2017) and its number-one single "Look What You Made Me Do".

After signing with Republic Records in 2018, Swift released the eclectic pop album Lover (2019) and the autobiographical documentary Miss Americana (2020). She explored indie folk styles on the 2020 albums Folklore and Evermore, subdued electropop on Midnights (2022), and re-recorded four albums subtitled Taylor's Version[a] after a dispute with Big Machine. These albums spawned the number-one songs "Cruel Summer", "Cardigan", "Willow", "Anti-Hero", "All Too Well", and "Is It Over Now?". Her Eras Tour (2023–2024) and its accompanying concert film became the highest-grossing tour and concert film of all time, respectively. Her eleventh album, The Tortured Poets Department (2024), was released as a double album. Swift has directed videos and films such as Folklore: The Long Pond Studio Sessions (2020) and All Too Well: The Short Film (2021), and has also acted in films.

Swift is one of the world's best-selling artists, with 200 million records sold worldwide as of 2019. She is the most-streamed artist on Spotify, the highest-grossing female touring act, and the first billionaire with music as the main source of income. Six of her albums have opened with over one million sales in a week. The 2023 Time Person of the Year, Swift has appeared on lists such as Rolling Stone's 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time, Billboard's Greatest of All Time Artists, and Forbes' World's 100 Most Powerful Women. Her accolades include 14 Grammy Awards, a Primetime Emmy Award, 40 American Music Awards, 39 Billboard Music Awards, and 23 MTV Video Music Awards; she has won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year, the MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year, and the IFPI Global Recording Artist of the Year a record four times each.

